REPORT 
ON 

REHABILITATION  AND  MODERNIZATION 

OF 


SAN  FRANCISCO'S  WAR  MEMORIAL  CULTURAL  CENTER 


By 

Public  Structures,  Inc. 
Wurster,  Bernardi  and  Emmons 


Skidmore,  Owing s  &  Merrill 
Architects 


1  February  1965  DOCUMENTS  DEPT- 

\/  I  IAN  2  3  2002 

SAN  FRANCISCO 
PUBLIC  LIBRARY 

PREPARED  FOR 


BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES,  WAR  MEMORIAL  OF  SAN  FRANCISCO 
Opera  House  -  Veterans'  Building  -  Art  Museum 


5/S 


San  Francisco  Public  Library 


REFERENCE  BOOK 

Not  to  be  taken  from  the  Library 


SAN  FRANCISCO  PUBLIC  LIBRARY 


3  1223  05971  7166 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2014 


https://archive.org/details/reportonrehabili1196publ 


II 


REPORT 
ON 

REHABILITATION  AND  MODERNIZATION 
OF 

SAN  FRANCISCO'S  WAR  MEMORIAL  CULTURAL  CENTER 


By 

Public  Structures,  Inc. 
Wurster,  Bernard!  and  Emmons 

Skidmore,  Cwings  &  Merrill 

Architects 


1  February  1965 


PREPARED  FOR 

BOARD  OF  TRUSTEES,  WAR  MEMORIAL  OF  SAN  FRANCISCO 
Opera  House  -  Veterans  Building  -  Art  Museum 


Executive  Staff 
Edward  Sharkey 

Managing  Director 
E.  Lawrence  George 

Executive  Secretary 


Trustees 

Wilson  Meyer,  President 

Harold  E.  Hubbard,  Vice  Pres. 

Philip  S.  Boone 

Fred  Campagnoli 

Richard  P.  Cooley 

George  T.  Davis 

Prentis  C.  Hale 

Gregory  A.  Harrison 

Sam  K.  Harrison 

Samuel  D.  Sayad 

Ralph  J.  A.  Stern 


1 


i 


3  1223  05971  7166 


INDEX 


I.  SUMMARY 

Assignment 
Survey  Method 

Findings  and  Recommendation 

II.  DESIGN  AND  USE  OF  OPERA  HOUSE  AND  VETERANS  BUILDING 

III.  CONDITION  OF  OPERA  HOUSE  AND  VETERANS  BUILDING 

IV.  NEED  FOR  OPERA  HOUSE  EXPANSION 

V.  NEED  FOR  2200-SEAT  HALL  FOR  THE  PERFORMING  ARTS 

VI.  PARKING  REQUIREMENTS 

VII.  PROPOSED  NEW  MUSICAL  ARTS  BUILDING 

VIII.  SITE  OF  PROPOSED  EXPANSION  OF  WAR  MEMORIAL  CULTURAL  CENTER 

IX.  ESTIMATE  OF  COST 

X.  CONCLUSIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS 

XI.  APPENDICES 

XII.  PLATES 


LIST  OF  APPENDICES  AND  PLATES 


Frontispiece 

Proposed  War  Memorial  Cultural  Center. 

XI.  APPENDICES 
Appendix  A 

War  Memorial  Opera  House  and  Veterans  Building  Rehabilitation  and 
Modernization. 

Appendix  B 

San  Francisco's  War  Memorial  Cultural  Center 
Preliminary  Estimate  of  Cost  -  1  February  1965 

XII.  PLATES 
Plate  1. 

Site  Allocation  Plan  -  1958  Civic  Center  Development  Plan 
Plate  2. 

War  Memorial  of  San  Francisco 
Opera  House  -  First  Floor  Plan 

Plate  3. 

War  Memorial  of  San  Francisco 
Veterans  Building  -  First  Floor  Plan 

Plate  4. 

Site  Plan  -  War  Memorial  Cultural  Center. 


-  1  - 


I.  SUMMARY 
Assignment 

On  October  1 ,  1964,  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  San  Francisco  War  Memorial 
Opera  and  Veterans  Building  retained  the  services  of  Skidmore,  Owings  &  Merrill 
and  Wurster,  Bernard!  and  Emmons,  Architects,  to  make  a  survey  of  these  two 
buildings.   The  purpose  of  this  survey  was ,  in  consultation  with  the  Trustees  and 
representatives  of  the  organizations  regularly  occupying  and  using  these  build- 
ings and  the  various  City  departments  concerned,  to  recommend  and  estimate  the 
cost  of  a  program  of  rehabilitation  and  modernization  of  these  two  buildings. 

The  survey  was  also  directed  towards  a  study  of  the  occupancy  and  utilization 
of  the  two  buildings  for  the  purposes  for  which  they  were  designed,  as  they  had 
developed  over  the  years ,  and  to  study  and  make  recommendations  for  various 
schemes  for  expansion  and  modernization  of  the  facilities  serving  these  uses 
and  upon  the  future  relationship  between  the  two  buildings . 

The  architects'  findings,  conclusions  and  recommendations  as  a  result  of  their 
survey  are  contained  in  this  report.    These  recommendations  include  a  program 
of  future  development  as  well  as  modernization  of  the  facilities  presently  con- 
tained in  these  two  buildings.   This  program  and  the  suggestions  for  its  imple- 
mentation are  designed  to  give  San  Francisco  an  adequate  and  up-to-date 
Cultural  Center  for  the  performing  and  visual  arts ,  comparable  to  any  in  the  country 
and  at  a  reasonable  cost.   This  program  provides  not  only  the  most  modern 
facilities  for  the  performing  arts,  such  as  the  opera,  symphony,  ballet  and 
theatrical  groups ,  but  for  the  San  Francisco  Museum  of  Art  and  the  Veterans 
organizations  as  well. 

Survey  Method 

The  Opera  House  and  Veterans  Building  were  inspected  by  the  architects'  heating 
ventilating  and  air  conditioning,  electrical  and  structural  engineers  and  their 
Acoustical  Consultants,  after  consultation  with  the  Trustees'  Building  Committee 
the  Manager  and  Operating  Engineer  of  the  buildings  and  representatives  of  the 
Department  of  Public  Works .    Past  deficiencies  and  deferred  maintenance  items 
reported  by  those  persons  concerned  with  the  buildings  were  investigated  and 
the  feasibility  and  cost  of  repairs  or  modernization  estimated. 

The  architects  held  interviews  with  representatives  of  the  organizations  regularly 
occupying  or  using  the  buildings  for  the  purposes  for  which  they  had  been  designed 
on  the  trustee,  director  and  management  levels.   These  organizations  included: 


II 
n 
a 

1 
1 
i 
i 
i 
i 

i 

V 

1 


f 

H 


-  2  - 


San  Francisco  Veterans 
San  Francisco  Museum  of  Art 
San  Francisco  Opera 
San  Francisco  Symphony 
San  Francisco  Ballet 

Other  musical  and  theatrical  groups,  both  civic  and  commercial,  were  also 
contacted  for  their  requirements  for  facilities  and  use. 

In  addition,  interviews  were  held  with  several  of  San  Francisco's  eminent  art 
and  music  critics,  at  which  their  opinion  concerning  the  merits  and  deficiencies 
of  the  concert  and  opera  facilities  were  obtained. 

These  interviews  were  designed  not  only  to  reveal  present  inadequacies  and 
deficiencies  in  the  two  buildings,  but  also  to  obtain  these  organizations'  present 
requirements,  both  as  to  space  and  function,  in  order  to  plan  and  estimate  any 
necessary  remodeling  or  expansion  of  the  buildings  to  bring  them  into  conformity 
with  their  occupants'  present-day  needs. 

From  these  interviews,  definite  space  requirements  for  present  and  future  use  of 
the  San  Francisco  Museum  of  Art,  Opera  and  Symphony  were  obtained.  These, 
on  a  minimum  basis,  exceed  their  present  space  within  the  two  buildings  and  in 
the  case  of  the   Opera,     cannot  be  accommodated  within  the  Opera  House. 

Although  not  contemplated  within  the  original  scope  of  their  services ,  when  the 
space  requirements  of  the  principal  organizations  obviously  exceeded  the  space 
in  the  Opera  House  and  in  the  case  of  the  Art  Museum  their  present  quarters  in 
the  Veterans  Building,  it  became  necessary  to  make  certain  preliminary  architec- 
tural and  site  studies  in  order  that  the  architects  could  incorporate  their  recom- 
mendations for  their  solution  and  the  cost  thereof  in  this  report.    The  development 
of  additional  space  had  been  forecast  by  the  architects  and  incorporated  in  the 
Civic  Center  Development  Plan  prepared  by  them  for  the  City  in  1958.  However, 
due  to  subsequent  developments  in  and  around  the  Civic  Center  area  and  the 
increase  in  these  space  requirements  over  the  intervening  years,  this  aspect  of 
the  problem  had  to  be  restudied  and  the  San  Francisco  Redevelopment  Agency  and 
various  City  Departments  consulted. 

Findings  and  Recommendation 

As  a  result  of  the  investigations  and  studies  conducted  during  the  course  of  their 
survey,  the  architects  found  that  the  Veterans'  Building  and  the  Opera  House 
needed  extensive  repairs,  alterations  and  modernization  of  mechanical,  stage, 
lighting  and  seating  equipment.    They  found  that  the  Veterans'  area  in  the 
Veterans  Building  needed  to  be  brought  up  to  date  for  the  veterans'  present  use 
of  the  space. 


1 

I 
I 


-  3  - 


In  addition,  they  found,  in  the  case  of  the  Opera  House,  a  need  for  additional 
space  far  beyond  the  capacity  of  the  present  building  to  accommodate  for  essen- 
tial administrative,  production  and  rehearsal  activities.   Similarly,  the  amount 
of  space  required  by  the  San  Francisco  Museum  of  Art,  and  the  Veterans'  organiza- 
tions, in  the  Veterans'  Building  and  adequate  public  access  to  it  require  extensive 
alterations  to  that  building  for  the  benefit  of  both  occupants .   They  found  as  well 
a  pressing  and  growing  need  for  a  2200-seat  hall  for  ballet,  chamber  music  and 
recital  performances  and  that  these  and  the  production  and  rehearsal  facilities 
lacking  in  the  Opera  House  could  be  combined  functionally  and  economically  in 
an  essential  new  Musical  Arts  Building  to  complete  the  present  War  Memorial 
Cultural  Center  established  by  the  construction  of  the  present  two  buildings  of 
San  Francisco's  War  Memorial. 

The  architects  found  that  the  sums  required  to  carry  out  this  essential  program 
would  seem  to  be  best  financed  by  an  immediate  General  Obligation  Bond  Issue 
and  they  recommend  that  the  War  Memorial  Trustees  request  the  Board  of  Super- 
visors to  place  such  a  bond  issue  on  the  November  1965  ballot  and  seek  the 
support  of  all  public  spirited  citizens  to  assure  its  passage. 

The  more  detailed  findings  leading  to  these  conclusions  will  be  found  in  the 
body  of  this  report  and  the  specific  recommendation  at  the  end  of  the  report. 
The  supporting  data  is  in  the  Appendices. 


I 

J 

I 


-  4  - 


II.         DESIGN  AND  USE  OF  THE  OPERA  HOUSE  AND  VETERANS  BUILDING 

The  War  Memorial  Opera  House  and  Veterans  Building  are  major  buildings  in 
San  Francisco's  justly  famous  Civic  Center  which  were  constructed  in  the  early 
1930's.    They  were  designed  by  Arthur  Brown,  Jr.  ,  the  Opera  House  in  collabora- 
tion with  G.  Albert  Landsburgh,  in  conformity  with  John  Galen  Howard's  plan  for 
the  Civic  Center.    They  are  two  balancing  symmetrical  buildings  subordinated  to 
and  flanking  the  City  Hall  across  Van  Ness  Avenue.    They  are  beautifully  designed 
in  the  French  Renaissance  style  of  the  Civic  Center  and  meticulously  and  harmoni- 
ously detailed  on  the  interior  and  exterior.    They  are  joined  together  by  the  carriage 
court  on  Franklin  Street  and  gilded  wrought  iron  gates  facing  Van  Ness  Avenue. 

The  interior  of  the  Opera  House  is  particularly  fine  and  is  reminiscent  of  European 
houses  and  surpassed  New  York's  older  Metropolitan  Opera  House  in  beauty  of 
exterior,  lobbies,  foyers  and  promenades.    The  hall  itself  has  a  dignity  and  beauty 
that  exceeds  that  of  contemporary  halls  and  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  match 
today.    The  Architect  has  confined  the  design  of  the  hall  to  simple  lines,  a  high 
ceiling  and  a  majestic  proscenium. 

The  hall  is  designed  for  opera  and  symphony  concerts,  although  used  for  other 
purposes.    It  seats  3252  persons  in  the  orchestra,  boxes,  dress  circle  and  balcony. 
The  sight  lines  are  good  and  the  acoustics  have  been  reasonably  satisfactory  for 
opera.    The  acoustics  have  been  less  successful  for  symphony,  and  in  recent 
years  a  demountable  acoustical  shell  has  been  designed  for  the  stage  by  Heinrich 
Keilholz,  the  eminent  German  acoustical  consultant,  in  collaboration  with  Skidmore; 
Owings  &  Merrill. 

The  main  hall  of  the  Opera  House  and  the  public  spaces  providing  circulation  to  it 
are  quite  satisfactory,  and  dear  to  the  hearts  of  San  Franciscans  and  music  lovers 
from  other  cities  who  know  it.    However,  the  space  behind  the  proscenium  is 
grossly  inadequate  for  the  directing  personnel  and  performers  and  the  multiple 
activities  necessary  before,  during  and  after  a  performance.    This  working  area 
is  not  only  inadequate  as  to  space,  but  also  hopelessly  obsolete  as  to  stage 
mechanical,  electrical,  sound,  rigging  and  lighting  equipment  by  modern-day 
standards,  as  35  years  of  stage  equipment  development  have  passed  since  the 
Opera  House  was  designed. 

The  Veterans  Building,  equally  beautiful  on  the  exterior  because  almost  identical 
to  the  Opera  House,  is  less  satisfactory  on  the  interior.    This  is  due  in  part  to 
the  double  occupancy  for  which  it  was  designed.  As  a  War  Memorial,  it  was 
designed  to  house  the  headquarters  and  activities  of  City  and  State  veterans' 
groups.   At  the  same  time,  it  was  designed  to  house  the  San  Francisco  Museum 
of  Art.    The  first  three  floors  of  the  building,   which  center  around  an  1100-seat 
auditorium  with  a  balcony  and  a  small  stage,  are  occupied  by  the  Veterans,  and 


« 


I 
I 


the  top  floor  is  occupied  by  the  Art  Museum.    The  central  feature  of  the  museum 
is  a  seventy-foot  octagonal  Statuary  Court  around  which  the  picture  galleries  are 
grouped. 

On  the  lower  three  floors  and  in  the  basement ,  meeting  rooms  and  offices  are 
arranged  around  three  sides  of  the  Veterans  Auditorium,  the  foyer  of  which  is  the 
Trophy  Gallery,  entered  through  the  lobby  on  Van  Ness  Avenue,  and  over  which  is 
a  two-story  library  and  lounge  surrounded  by  a  loggia. 

The  principal  public  entrance  to  the  building  is  into  the  Veterans'  part  of  the 
building,  whereas  the  entrance  to  the  San  Francisco  Museum  of  Art  is  on 
McAllister  Street  around  the  corner  from  the  main  Van  Ness  Avenue  entrance. 
The  public  attracted  by  the  Museum  enters  through  this  side  door  and  then  ascends 
to  the  fourth  floor  of  the  building  in  a  small  antiquated  passenger  elevator.  When 
this  public  is  large,  as  it  is  at  previews  and  openings  of  exhibits,  or  when 
Symphony  luncheons  or  lectures  are  given,  this  entrance  and  the  present  elevators 
are  inadequate . 

The  Veterans  Auditorium,  which  is  designed  as  a  multi-purpose  room  with  a 
mechanically-operated  floor  which  can  either  be  stepped  with  temporary  seats 
as  an  auditorium  or  kept  level  to  serve  as  a  dance  floor,  is  used  as  an  auditorium 
for  smaJl  concerts,  school  graduations,  lectures  and  similar  events  and  only 
occasionally  for  dances,  perhaps  because  its  architectural  effect  is  pretentious 
but  gloomy.    The  Rotunda  in  the  fourth  floor  Museum  gets  such  constant  use  as 
an  assembly  room  that  it  is  not  used  for  its  original  purpose  of  a  Statuary  Court. 

The  Museum  has  also  had  to  convert  the  original  library  into  administrative 
offices  and  a  portion  of  the  North  Gallery  into  a  Members'  Room. 

In  contrast  to  the  Opera  House,  the  working  areas  of  which  are  critically  over- 
crowded and  vibrant  with  activity,  and  the  public  areas  of  which  are  filled  with 
life  and  color  during  the  opera  and  symphony  seasons  and  during  other  perform- 
ances between  these  seasons,  the  Veterans'  Building,  except  for  the  Art  Museum, 
seems  relatively  commodious  for  its  present  intensity  of  use  by  the  Veterans.  If 
modernized  and  redecorated,  it  would  be  used  more  intensively  by  the  Veterans 
and  others.    At  the  same  time,  the  entrance  to  the  Art  Museum  should  be  revised 
to  accommodate  conveniently  and  expeditiously  the  public  which  it  serves  with 
appropriate  identification  and  graciousness  commensurate  with  its  importance 
to  the  cultural  life  of  San  Francisco. 

These  two  buildings  may  justly  be  considered  as  San  Francisco's  War  Memorial 
Cultural  Center. 


(See  Plates  1 ,  2  and  3.) 


5 


1 

i 
I 


-  6  - 


III.       CONDITION  OF  OPERA  HOUSE  AND  VETERANS  BUILDING 

Although  the  City  of  San  Francisco,  realizing  the  beauty  and  civic  importance  of 
these  two  buildings,  has  kept  up  their  exterior  appearance  over  the  years  by  sand- 
blasting the  stone  work  and  painting  the  wrought  iron  work,  the  City  has  not  been 
able  to  combat  obsolescence  of  the  mechanical  plant  nor  add  modern  improvements 
required  for  efficient  and  successful  use  of  the  premises.    Nor  has  the  City,  during 
a  period  when  population  growth  in  the  Bay  Area  and  consequent  expansion  of  civic 
services  have  imposed  a  severe  strain  on  the  tax  dollar,  been  able  to  appropriate 
sufficient  money  for  essential  repairs  and  capital  improvements. 

The  result  is  that  quite  apart  from  the  need  for  additional  space  in  the  Opera  House 
for  behind-the-stage  activities  and  for  remodeling  of  the  Veterans'  Building  for  their 
expanded  activities  and  handling  of  the  public  of  the  Museum  of  Art,  the  repair  and 
replacement  of  obsolescence  and  the  modernization  of  the  physical  plant  of  these 
two  buildings  to  serve  the  purposes  for  which  they  are  used  now  would  require  the 
expenditure  of  a  sum  greater  than  seems  practical  to  finance  from  ad  valorem  taxes. 

Unfortunately,  the  most  serious  of  the  deficiencies  and  the  most  important  items 
of  obsolescence  are  at  the  same  time  the  most  expensive  to  correct  and  yet  the 
most  essential  to  the  proper  functioning  of  the  two  buildings  to  properly  serve 
their  important  cultural  and  memorial  uses:   the  elevators  must  be  replaced  and 
modernized,  the  Opera  House  and  Veterans  Auditorium  seating  replaced  and  these 
halls  air  conditioned  and  the  plumbing  and  heating  systems  rehabilitated. 

The  stage  area  of  the  Opera  House  and  to  a  lesser  extent  of  the  Veterans  Auditorium 
must  be  completely  modernized,  including,  in  the  Opera  House,  the  stage  rigging, 
curtains  and  draperies  and  motors,  new  cycloramas  ,  the  stage  flooring  and  raising, 
mechanism,  a  new  stage  lighting  system  with_  switchboard ,  dimmers  and  control 
consoles,  sound,  paging  and  closed  circuit  TV  systems,  enlargement  of  the  orchestra 
pit  and  a  new  prompter's  box,  house  lighting  and  possible  enlargement  of  the  boxes. 
There  is  the  need  also  in  the  Opera  House  and  included  in  the  rehabilitation  costs 
for  much-needed  additional  box  seating,  Opera  Museum,  Green  Room,  Musical 
Library  and  expanded  dressing  rooms  and  showers  for  the  opera  supernumeraries. 

Besides  the  extensive  remodeling  of  the  Art  Museum's  space  in  the  Veterans  Building 
and  the  appropriate  remodeling  of  the  Veterans'  portion  of  their  building  to  fulfill 
their  present-day  requirements  for  administration,  meetings  and  social  and  recrea- 
tional activities ,  there  are  items  in  both  buildings  which  architecturally  can  be 
characterized  as  deferred  maintenance,  including  the  repair  of  sidewalks,  walls, 
balconies  ,  roofs  and  skylights  of  both  buildings . 

A  more  detailed  description  and  estimates  of  cost  of  these  items  of  repair,  replace- 
ment and  remodeling  of  the  Opera  House  and  the  Veterans  Building  prepared  by  the 
Architects  following  their  inspections  and  investigations  will  be  found  in  the 
Appendix  of  this  report. 

Allocations  for  modernization  of  the  areas  are  tentative  and  will  be  subject  to 
modification  in  the  next  phase  of  the  Architectural  planning  after  determination 
by  the  Board  of  Trustees. 


-  7  - 


IV.        NEED  FOR  OPERA  HOUSE  EXPANSION 

Fortunately  for  San  Francisco,  her  pre-eminence  as  a  center  of  the  Musical  Arts 
has  not  been  dependent  in  the  past  on  the  adequacy  or  modernity  of  the  Opera 
Louse.    It  has  been  due  rather  to  the  vitality,  enthusiasm  and  devotion  of  its 
artists,  musicians  and  directors  and  the  support  of  the  citizens  of  the  community. 

Even  a  cursory  inspection  of  the  areas  of  the  Opera  House  where  those  responsible 
for  the  perfection  of  the  performances  of  the  opera,  symphony  and  ballet  must 
prepare,  rehearse  and  produce  the  final  performances  reveals  the  physical  handi- 
caps of  space  and  facilities  and  equipment  under  which  they  have  achieved  the 
perfection  of  the  finished  performance  before  the  audience.    In  spite  of  these 
physical  handicaps,  the  energetic  and  talented  staffs  of  our  Opera  and  Symphony 
have  made  San  Francisco  the  production  center  for  these  arts  to  serve  other  cities 
on  the  west  coast. 

The  deficiencies  behind  the  scenes,  which  exist  in  spite  of  the  suitability  and 
beauty  of  the  front  of  the  house,  and  the  tradition  of  excellence  of  the  performances 
of  the  opera,  symphony  and  ballet,  become  progressively  hampering  and  discouraging 
to  the  performers  as  other  cities  acquire  more  modern  and  efficient  facilities. 

Some  of  these  deficiencies  are  due  to  obsolescence  and  deferred  or  under  mainten- 
ance; others  are  due  to  lack  of  incorporation  of  modern  improvements  in  mechanical 
and  stage  equipment  and  lighting  as  they  developed.    In  this  report,  these  have 
been  investigated  and  their  costs  included  in  the  rehabilitation  of  the  Opera  House 
within  the  confines  of  the  present  building. 

However,  were  all  of  these  improvements  to  be  carried  out,  under  any  scheme  of 
financing  for  the  rehabilitation,  the  physical  limitations  of  the  existing  Opera 
House  and  the  space  and  physical  facilities  which  it  provides  for  the  production 
staffs  and  other  backstage  personnel  and  for  rehearsals  of  the  Opera,  Symphony 
and  Ballet  would  still  be  grossly  inadequate. 

The  lack  of  auxiliary  rehearsal  space  often  necessitates  use  of  the  Opera  House 
itself  for  this  purpose  ,  and  this  makes  it  unavailable  for  rental  with  a  consequent 
loss  of  revenue  at  these  times.   At  other  times,  when  the  hall  and  stage  are  not 
available,  the  opera  company  has  had  to  rent  auditoriums  and  even  less  suitable 
improvise'd  space  for  rehearsals.    The  room  in  the  Opera  House  now  being  used  for. 
chorus  rehearsals  is  too  small  to  accommodate  the  modern  chorus  with  its  addi- 
tional personnel.    Opera  principals  and  other  performers  are  obliged  to  use  their 
dressing  rooms  as  rehearsal  rooms,  which  is  artistically  and  acoustically  inappro- 
priate. 

The  San  Francisco  Symphony  and  Opera  orchestras  have  some  75  to  100  musicians 
to  rehearse.   While  final  rehearsals  of  the  full  orchestra  can  only  be  held  in  the 
orchestra  pit  of  the  Opera  House,  this,  as  previously  mentioned,  is  too  small 


I 

i 
I 
I 
I 
I 

1 

I 
I 
I 


-  8  - 


even  for  the  present  complement  of  the  orchestra.    Space  for  preliminary  simul- 
taneous rehearsals  of  various  size  groups  is  seriously  lacking.   What  is  required 
is  a  mockup  rehearsal  stage  of  the  full  dimensions  of  the  Opera  House  stage,  as 
well  as  two  additional  blocking  stages  for  the  opera,  a  chorus  rehearsal  room, 
solo  rehearsal  rooms  for  the  principals,  a  ballet  studio  with  mirrors  and  rails  for 
rehearsals  and  a  hall  for  orchestra  rehearsals. 

Dressing  rooms  for  principals  and  dressing  rooms  and  locker  rooms,  toilets  and 
showers  for  chorus  and  extras  are  grossly  inadequate.   The  latter  cannot  remove 
their  makeup  and  these  deficiencies  in  dressing  accommodations  are  becoming  of 
concern  to  the  Union.    There  is  also  no  canteen  where  the  stage  hands  and  per- 
formers can  eat.    Rooms  originally  designed  as  dressing  rooms  have  had  to  be 
commandeered  as  offices  for  the  administration  and  direction  of  the  opera  and 
symphony  and  ballet. 

Stage  and  art  directors,  designers,  wig,  makeup,  costume  and  office  personnel 
are  now  working  for  the  most  part  in  the  former  dressing  rooms,  in  halls  and  closets 
and  space  for  office  and  reproduction  machines  is  almost  nonexistent.    In  addition 
to  office  space,  space  is  needed  for  conference  rooms. 

There  is  inadequate  space  for  shops  in  the  Opera  House.    The  present  carpenter 
shop  is  too  small  for  large  stage  props  and  its  third  floor  location  renders  it 
almost  inaccessible.    Blacksmith    for    metal  work,  electrical,  wig,  sewing  and 
paint  shops  are  also  needed. 

There  is  inadequate  storage  for  scenery,  properties,  costumes  and  wigs  ,  and  the 
present  loading  facilities,  directly  onto  the  rear  stage,  are  too  restricted  and  too 
disruptive.    As  many  as  80  van  loads  of  scenery  can  be  involved  in  a  season; 
therefore,  four  unloading  docks  should  be  provided  on  the  same  level  as  the  main 
stage  and  the  mockup  stage,  but  with  access  to  and  on  the  same  level  as  storage 
and  shops , 

These  facilities,  while  all  functional  workrooms,  are  essential  to  the  efficient 
utilization  of  the  performance  and  public  areas  of  the  Opera  House.  Obviously, 
to  realize  their  full  utilitarian  potentialities,  they  must  be  adjacent  to  the  Opera 
House  and  ideally  directly  connected  to  it.    The  experience  of  operas  in  other 
cities  which  do  not  have  such  auxiliary  space  close  by  indicates  this.  Covent 
Garden  in  London  has  an  auxiliary  building  located  several  miles  away,  a  distance 
which  its  director  says  poses  serious  difficulties  for  their  opera's  operation. 


I 


-  9  - 


V.        NEED  FOR  2200-SEAT  HALL  FOR  THE  PERFORMING  ARTS 

The  Opera  House  seats  3250  persons  in  the  orchestra,  grand  tier,  boxes  and 
balcony.    The  hall  is  primarily  designed  for  operas.    Two-thirds  of  the  seats  are 
too  distant  from  the  stage  for  the  intimate  visual  contact  with  the  dancers  neces- 
sary for  the  ballet  or  for  other  performances  which  do  not,  as  the  ballet  does  not, 
draw  an  audience  which  fills  the  Opera  House. 

The  auditorium  in  the  Veterans'  Building  which  seats  1100  persons,  is  too  small 
for  the  ballet,  is  too  long  and  narrow  to  provide  intimate  audience  contact  with 
the  stage,  and  the  stage  area  itself  is  too  small  and  by  modern  standards  its 
eguipment  too  small  and  primitive  and  its  dressing  room  facilities  inadequate  for 
the  ballet. 

At  the  present  time,  therefore,  the  Opera  House  is  used  for  the  performances  of 
the  opera,  the  symphony  and  the  San  Francisco  Ballet,  all  of  which  occur  during 
the  seasons  in  the  fall,  winter  and  early  spring.    There  is  a  need  and  the  policy 
has  already  been  adopted  to  lengthen  these  individual  seasons  and  to  develop  the 
spring  opera.    In  several  years  the  symphony  season  will  be  34  weeks.    The  con- 
tinuing trend  will  crowd  the  scheduled  use  of  the  Opera  House  to  the  point  that  the 
ballet,  which  does  not  need  and  does  not  fill  the  full  capacity  of  the  Opera  House, 
will  be  forced  out. 

Since  the  raockup  or  rehearsal  stage  which  must  be  constructed  to  serve  the  Opera 
House  will  have  the  space,  the  stage  equipment fc  the  stage  lighting  and  the  sup- 
porting facilities  for  the  performers  and  since- the  need  exists  for  a  medium-sized 
hall  for  the  ballet,  recitals  and  chamber  music,  it  is  recommended  that  the  new 
building  be  designed  to  provide  a  2200-seat  hall.    This  can  be  done  with  a  mini- 
mum of  additiona1  expense,  the  mockup  stage  being  designed  to  service  both 
purposes:  rehearsals  of  the  opera  and  the  ballet  and  by  enlarging  the  building  and 
with  a  minimum  of  duplication,  a  separate  performing  stage  for  the  new  2200-seat 
hall. 

This  will  satisfy  San  Francisco's  need  for  a  hall  for  performances  for  an  audience 
of  from  2000  to  2200  persons,  a  size  halfway  between  the  3250-seat  Opera  House 
and  the  1100-seat  Veterans  Auditorium.   It  will  also  provide  in  the  new  cultural 
center  that  which  is  now  lacking:  a  home  for  the  uniquely  successful  San  Francisco 
Ballet  and  an  important  recital  and  chamber  music  hall.    This  new  building  can,  of 
course,  also  house  a  repertory  theater. 


I 


-  10  - 


VI.         PARKING  REQUIREMENTS 

The  Civic  Center  Development  Plan,  prepared  by  the  War  Memorial  Trustees' 
architects  in  1958  for  the  City,  which  projected  the  requirements  for  governmental 
and  non-governmental  facilities  in  the  Civic  Center  areathrough  1973,  contains  an 
off-street  parking  program  phased  to  be  carried  out  progressively  parallel  with  the 
construction  of  the  facilities  upon  which  the  parking  demand  is  based.  This  park- 
ing program  was  formulated  on  the  basis  of  a  traffic  and  parking  study  of  the  area 
which  examined  existing  and  projected  demands  and  capacities. 

Eventually  the  General  Development  Plan,  when  carried  out,  will  contain  five 
parking  garages  and  two  parking  lots  ,  and  additional  parking  areas  within  govern- 
ment buildings  for  "official  parking",  when  the  Civic  Center  area  reaches  its  ulti- 
mate development.   When  this  program  is  completed,  there  will  be  5700  spaces 
available  to  the  public,  including  the  now  completed  Civic  Center  Garage  under 
the  north  side  of  the  Plaza. 

The  nearest  and  most  pertinent  parking  in  the  Development  Plan  to  serve  the 
cultural  activities  taking  place  in  the  Opera  House  and  Veterans  Building  is  a 
multi-story  1200-car  garage  located  directly  south  of  the  Opera  House  and  connected 
to  it  by  a  pedestrian  tunnel  on  the  former  Commercial  High  School  athletic  field 
across  Grove  Street.    This  entire  block  is  now  devoted  to  surface  parking.  The 
other  is  somewhat  smaller  garage  to  be  located  directly  across  McAllister  Street 
north  of  the  Veterans  Building. 

Since  the  public  attending  the  opera,  symphony" and  ballet,  and  dances  and  con- 
certs in  the  Veterans  Building,  dinners  at  the  opening  of  the  opera  and  previews  of 
exhibits  in  the  Museum  of  Art  attend  these  functions  in  black  tie  or  full  evening 
dress,  the  parking  serving  them  must  be  close  by  and  have  undercover  access  to 
these  buildings,  as  does  the  Union  Square  Garage  to  the  St.  Francis  Hotel  and 
the  garage  under  the  Masonic  Auditorium  on  Nob  Hill. 

The  proposed  new  2200-seat  hall  was  not  contemplated  when  the  Civic  Center 
Development  Plan  was  made.    It  is,  therefore,  recommended  that  parking  of  up  to 
700  cars  be  incorporated  in  the  proposed  expansion  to  serve  this  additional  public 
at  night  and  to  serve  the  musicians  and  performers  using  it  for  rehearsals  during 
the  day.   This  parking  would  also  serve  the  veterans  and  museum  events  in  the 
rehabilitated  Veterans  Building  as  well.   A  passenger  unloading  platform  at  the 
garage  entrance  can  be  designed  which  will  take  the  public  up  to  the  court  level 
and  from  there  under  cover  into  each  of  the  three  buildings  which  will  then  make 
up  a  new  Cultural  Center  for  San  Francisco. 

The  proposed  parking  garages  in  the  Civic  Center  Development  Plan,  north  and  south 
of  this  new  San  Francisco  Cultural  Center,  will  be  needed  too,  of  course,  and 
should  be  built  as  soon  as  their  financing  can  be  arranged.   However,  the  parking 


I 

I 


-  11  - 


in  the  new  building  will  be  critically  needed  when  that  building  is  finished,  both 
to  serve  it  and  the  other  two  War  Memorial  buildings ,  and  it  should  therefore  be 
included  in  the  financing  of  that  building. 


II 


II 

■ 

II 


I 
I 


-  12  - 


VII.         PROPOSED  NEW  MUSICAL  ARTS  BUILDING 

The  need  for  expansion  of  the  back  of  the  stage  facilities  and  services  of  the 
Opera  House  and  the  need  for  a  new  2200-seat  hall  for  ballet,  repertory  theater, 
recitals  and  chamber  music,  all  of  which  are  essential  if  the  War  Memorial 
Cultural  Center  is  to  contain  the  modern  facilities  necessary  for  San  Francisco 
to  maintain  its  long-standing  leadership  as  the  vital  production  center  in  the  west, 
require  a  third  building  to  supplement  the  Opera  House  and  Veterans'  Building. 
This  building  might  be  called  the  Musical  Arts  Building  until  a  more  appropriate 
name  is  chosen. 

The  proposed  new  building  should  contain  the  following  facilities: 
A.     For  Opera 

1.  Separate  mockup  stage,  same  size  as  Opera  House  stage,  with  90-foot  high 
fly  gallery. 

2.  Two  blocking  stages  (52  x  46  feet). 

3.  Orchestra  rehearsal  hall  with  storage,  lockers  and  toilets. 

4.  Ballet  rehearsal  stage  (same  as  blocking  stage  but  with  mirrors,  rails, 
etc.)  with  dressing  rooms  and  showers. 

5.  Chorus  rehearsal  room  for  85  singers,  conductor  and  piano  with  a 
separate  room  or  rooms  for  conductors. 

6.  A  second  chorus  room  for  45  people  and  piano.   Both  #5  and  #6  with 
lockers  and  toilets . 

7.  Three  ensemble  rooms  for  10  or  more  people  each. 

8.  Twelve  coaching  rooms  for  3  persons  and  piano,  each. 

9.  Lounges  for  men  and  women  (2). 

10.  Canteen. 

11.  Dressing  rooms : 

a.  Ballet  -  for  20  men  and  for  30  women. 

b.  Supernumeraries  -  150  people. 

c.  Boys'  chorus  -  30  people. 

d.  All  of  the  above  to  have  toilets  and  showers. 


-  13  - 


12.  Offices: 

a.  Conference  room. 

b.  Mr.  Adler  and  two  secretaries. 

c.  One  office  each  for  Adler's  assistant  and  coordinator. 

d.  Technical  assistant. 

e.  3  stage  directors  and  2  assistants  -  5  offices. 

f .  Publicity  office  for  two  people  and  one  temporary  assistant. 

g.  Rehearsal  office  for  two  persons  and  reception. 

h.  Rooms  for  six  conductors  with  toilets  and  lockers. 

i.  All  of  the  above  to  have  file  space  and  storage  areas. 
J .  General  toilet  facilities  . 

13.  Music  library  -  in  addition  to  working  library  in  the  Opera  House. 

14.  Shops: 

a.  Costumes  -  drying  room  and  work  rooms. 

b.  Carpenter's  shop  (30'  minimum  height) . 

c.  Paint  shop  and  drying  area. 

d.  Plastic  shop  with  ventilation. 

e.  Machine  and  blacksmith  shop. 

f.  Electrical  shop. 

g.  Properties  shop. 

h.  Scenery  sewing  room. 

1.  All  of  the  above  to  have  lockers,  storage  and  toilets. 


-  14  - 


15.     Storage  and  receiving  for  road  shows  and  San  Francisco  Opera. 

Mockup  stage  and  receiving  should  be  on  the  same  level  as  the 
Opera  House  stage  which  necessitates  a  Franklin  Street  undarpass. 

B.  For  Symphony 

1.  Offices: 

a.  Conference  Room  for  70  people. 

b.  Three  accounting  rooms. 

c.  Three  executive  offices. 

d.  Room  for  mailing,  etc.  sound  deadened. 

e.  Storage  and  toilet  facilities  fordl  of  the  above. 

2.  Music  Library  -  this  could  be  combined  with  the  Opera  library. 

3.  Instrument  Storage  -  for  smaller  instruments  which  are  not  stored  in 
the  Opera  House  itself. 

4.  Dressing  rooms  with  lockers,  toilets  and  showers. 

5.  Rehearsal  rooms  -  could  be  combined  with  those  for  Opera. 

6.  Practice  rooms  -  these  are  primarily  for  "warm-up". 

C.  For  Public 

1.  2200-seat  hall  for  ballet  performances,  repertory  theater,  incidental 
concerts  and  other  appropriate  musical  events. 

2.  Necessary  lobbies ,  foyers,  ticket  offices  ,  toilets,  etc. 

3.  Restaurant  for  the  public. 

4.  Parking  for  up  to  700  cars,  with  vertical  transportation  and  under-cover 
surface  communication  to  the  hall  and  to  the  Opera  House  and  Veterans 
Building.  Access  to  and  egress  from  the  garage  should  allow  drivers  to 
deposit  and  pick  up  passengers  at  Opera  House  audience  arrival  platforms. 


1 


-  15  - 


5.  Revision  of  the  present  vehicular  arrival  court  between  the  Opera 
House  and  Veterans  Building  to  serve  all  three  buildings. 

6.  Memorial  forecourt  which  can  also  serve  as  an  outdoor  statuary 
court  of  the  San  Francisco  Museum  of  Art. 

(See  Frontispiece.) 


-  16  - 


Vin.      SITE  OF  PROPOSED  EXPANSION  OF  THE  WAR  MEMORIAL  CULTURAL  CENTER 

San  Francisco  is  fortunate  in  having  land  for  the  proposed  expansion  of  the  Cultural 
Center  ideally  located  immediately  behind  the  Opera  House  and  Veterans  Building 
to  which  the  new  building  could  be  directly  connected  by  bridging  the  underpass 
so  that  the  three  buildings  can  function  together  as  a  unified  Cultural  Center. 
This  land  is  marked  for  development  by  the  San  Francisco  Redevelopment  Agency 
in  the  immediate  future.   Both  the  Redevelopment  Agency  and  its  director  have 
stated  in  writing  that  they  regard  this  land  as  set  aside  for  this  purpose. 

The  Site  Allocation  Plan  of  the  Civic  Center  Development  Plan  shows  the  block 
bounded  by  Franklin,  Grove,  Gough  and  Fulton  Streets  east  of  the  central  freeway 
allocated  to  an  Opera  Auxiliary  Building  with  contiguous  surface  parking.  This 
block  was  chosen  because  it  is  directly  behind  the  stage  of  the  Opera  House  and 
can,  as  it  must,  have  a  direct  connection  to  it  over  Franklin  Street. 

The  block  immediately  north  of  this  block  between  Fulton  and  McAllister  Streets 
along  Franklin  Street,  is  also  in  The  San  Francisco  Redevelopment  Agency's 
Western  Addition  Project  Area  A-2.   The  only  new  building  on  these  two  blocks  is 
the  well-designed,  two-story  building  of  the  California  State  Bar  Assosiation,  the 
entrance  to  which  is  at  601  McAllister  Street  at  the  corner  of  Franklin.   The  service 
entrance  to  this  building  is  at  the  east  end  of  Ash  Street,  a  dead-end  alley  leading 
off  of  Gough  Street . 

The  Central  Freeway,  a  50-foot  high,  two-level  structure,  slashes  diagonally 
across  these  two  blocks  from  southwest  to  northeast,  from  the  intersection  of 
Grove  and  Gough  Streets  to  behind  the  California  Bar  Association  property.  The 
freeway  structure  thus  forms  a  physical  barrier  and  therefore  a  positive  boundary 
of  the  Civic  Center  Development  area  on  the  west.   It  also  cuts  off  abruptly,  at 
Gough  Street,  the  former  vista  of  the  west  portico  of  the  City  Hall  as  seen  through 
the  court  between  the  Opera  House  and  Veterans  Building  as  one  approached  the 
Civic  Center  from  the  west  along  Fulton  Street.   This  formidable  physical  and 
visual  barrier  of  the  Central  Freeway  isolates  the  property  in  these  two  blocks 
fronting  on  Franklin  Street  and  make  it  logical  and  desirable  to  develop  them  in 
a  manner  which  is  harmonious  in  use  and  design  to  form  a  western  terminus  of 
the  symmetrical  Civic  Center  and  backdrop  to  the  beautiful  court  between  the 
Opera  House  and  Veterans  Building  in  such  a  way  as  to  mask  the  ponderous  two- 
story  freeway  structure. 

The  approved  Land  Use  Plan  of  the  Western  Addition  Project  Area  A-2  redevelop- 
ment plan  designates  these  two  blocks  as  commercial  or  public  use  of  intermediate 
density. 

The  Redevelopment  Plan  also  indicates  diagonal  streets  cutting  across  the  corners 
of  Gough  and  Grove  and  Gough  and  McAllister  Streets,  the  latter  under,  and  on 
the  right-of-way  of,  the  freeway.   The  purpose  of  these  diagonal  streets  is  to 


-  17  - 


utilize  the  full  traffic  potential  of  Fulton  Street  west  of  Gough  for  traffic  headed 
for  or  returning  from  the  downtown  area.    The  Redevelopment  Plan,  nevertheless, 
shows  Fulton  Street  continuing  eastward  from  Gough  to  its  present  terminus  at 
Franklin  Street,  which,  with  the  two  diagonal  streets  diverting  the  traffic  from 
this  block  of  Fulton,  serves  little  purpose.   We  therefore  recommend  that  the 
right-of-way  of  Fulton  Street  through  this  block  be  incorporated  in  the  land  offered 
for  redevelopment  along  Franklin  Street,  especially  since  the  new  diagonal  diver- 
sionary street  at  the  southwest  corner  of  this  block  considerably  reduced  the 
original  site  allocated  in  the  Civic  Center  Development  Plan  to  the  proposed  new 
building . 

The  traffic  on  Franklin  Street  is  one  way  traveling  north  from  Market  Street.  Upon 
acquisition  of  the  property  and  demoliton  of  the  existing  older  buildings  on  these 
two  blocks ,  there  will  be  no  other  buildings  requiring  access  or  service  from 
Franklin  Street  since  the  California  Bar  Association  Building  which  would  remain 
has  access  from  McAllister  Street  and  service  from  the  alley  behind  it.   It  is  there- 
fore high  desirable  to  have  Franklin  Street  underpass  the  new  building  and  connect 
it  and  form  an  entrance  court  to  it  which  will  in  fact  be  an  extension  of  the  court 
between  the  Veterans  Building  and  the  Opera  House  between  Grove  and  McAllister 
Streets . 

This  will  unify  as  one  site, uninterrupted  by  through  traffic, the  land  occupied  by 
the  proposed  new  building,  the  Opera  House  and  the  Veterans  Memorial  Building. 
It  makes  it  possible  to  design  a  proper  and  fitting  western  termination  of  the  Civic 
Center,  masking  the  freeway  structure  and  allowing  these  three  cultural  buildings 
to  be  related  to  each  other  aesthetically  and  functionally  as  a  new  and  expanded 
San  Francisco  Cultural  Center. 

It  is  therefore  the  recommendation  of  the  Architects  that  the  land  along  Franklin 
Street  from  Grove  Street  north  to  the  south  line  of  the  California  State  Bar  Associa- 
tion property  and  east  of  the  Central  Freeway  right-of-way  ,  and  the  proposed 
southwest  diagonal  between  Gough  and  Grove  Streets,  including  the  right-of-way 
of  Fulton  Street,  be  designated  and  acquired  as  the  site  of  the  proposed  new 
Musical  Arts  Building  and  that  this  site  be  further  enlarged  and  connected  to  the  land 
now  occupied  by  the  two  San  Francisco  War  Memorial  Buildings  by  the  land  over 
the  proposed  underpass  on  Franklin  Street  between  Grove  and  McAllister  Streets. 

In  addition,  the  45-foot  wide  strip  of  City-owned  property  behind  the  Opera  House 
and  Veterans  Building  on  the  east  side  of  Franklin  Street  will  be  incorporated  in  the 
development. 

This  site,  eminently  suitable,  in  the  proper  location  with  respect  to  these  two 
buildings,  will  total  3-1/2  acres  subdivided  as  follows: 


i 


-  18  - 


Portion  of  Grove  ,  Franklin  block 
Portion  of  Franklin,  McAllister  block 
Fulton  Street  right-of-way,  Gough  to  Franklin 
Over  proposed  Franklin  Street  underpass 
City  land  east  of  Franklin 


1.55  acres 
.50  acres 
.40  acres 
.40  acres 
. 65  acres 


Total 


3.50  acres 


The  almost  an  acre  of  land  in  the  right-of-way  of  Fulton  Street  and  over  Franklin 
Street  might,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  City,  be  deeded,  in  the  case  of  the 
former,  and  the  air  rights  granted,  in  the  case  of  the  latter  parcel  of  land,  at  no 
cost  other  than  the  diversion  of  the  utilities  in  these  two  streets,  the  cost  of 
which  is  included  in  the  construction  estimate.     It  has  been  assumed  in  the 
estimate  of  cost  of  the  land  that  this  can  and  will  be  done. 

(See  Plates  1  and  4) 


-  19  - 


IX.  ESTIMATE  OF  COST 

It  Is  estimated  that  the  cost  of  the  entire  project  of  rehabilitating  and  modernizing 
the  present  Veterans  Memorial  Building  and  the  construction  of  the  essential  ex- 
pansion of  the  facilities  lacking  in  the  Opera  House  in  the  proposed  new  Musical 
Arts  Building  would  require  a  General  Obligation  Bond  Issue.   These  estimated 
costs  include  land  and  building ,  contingencies ,  fees ,  administration  and  finan- 
cing costs  and  allowance  for  rise  in  construction  costs  as  well  as  the  necessary 
allowance  for  overtime  on  the  rehabilitation  work  due  to  the  fact  that  the  work 
in  the  Opera  House  and  Veterans  Building  must  be  done  while  the  buildings  are  in 
operation. 

The  General  Obligation  Bond  Issue  required  would  be  in  the  amount  of  $29,000,000, 
made  up  as  follows: 

BOND  ISSUE  ESTIMATE  SUMMARY 
A.    Rehabilitation  and  Modernization 

1 .     Veterans  Memorial  Building 

a.  Veterans  Area  $2,100,000 

b.  Art  Museum  Area  2,000,000 


2.    Opera  House 

Symphony  and  Opera  $5,800,000 


B.    New  Construction  -  Musical  Arts  Building 


$4,100,000 


$5,800,000 
$9,900,000 


1.  Opera,  Symphony,  Ballet  administration, 
production  center  and  2200-seat  hall  for 
public  performances  of  ballet,  incidental 

concerts,  recitals  and  repertory  groups  .  $8,875,000 

2.  700-car  garage  6,100,000 

3.  Franklin  Street  Underpass  1  ,500,000 

Subtotal  $16,475,000 

Total  Construction  $26,375,000 

C .    Land  2,625,000 

Estimated  Bond  Issue  Required  $29,000,000 


-  20  - 


X.  CONCLUSIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS 

Based  upon  their  conclusions  reached  on  the  basis  of  their  survey,  investiga- 
tions and  studies,  the  architects  make  the  following  recommendations  to  the 
Trustees  of  the  San  Francisco  War  Memorial. 

1.  The  Veterans  Memorial  Building  and  Opera  House  should  be  rehabilitated 
and  modernized  in  accordance  with  the  detailed  recommendations  contained 
in  Appendix  A  of  this  report. 

2.  In  addition,  the  facilities  of  the  backstage  area  of  the  Opera  House  must  be 
expanded  beyond  the  confines  of  the  present  building. 

3.  There  is  a  growing  need  for  a  2200-seat  Ballet  and  Concert  Hall  with 
adequate  staff  and  public  inside  parking. 

4.  The  spai .  needed  for  the  rehearsal  and  production  activities  of  the  Opera 
and  Symphony  and  the  2200-seat  Ballet  and  Concert  Hall  should  be 
located  in  a  new  building  connected  at  stage  level  to  the  Opera  House  for 
movement  of  scenery  and  with  under-cover  circulation  for  the  public  between 
this  new  Musical  Arts  building  with  its  garage  and  the  Opera  House  and 
Veterans  Memorial  Building.    This  will  require  an  underpass  to  be  constructed 
for  Franklin  Street  between  Grove  and  McAllister  Streets. 

5.  The  proposed  Musical  Arts  building  should  be  located  on  the  site  in  the 
Western  Addition  Redevelopment  Project  Area  A-2  east  of  the  central  free- 
way between  Gough  Street  and  the  California  State  Bar  Association  property 
at  the  corner  of  McAllister  Street,  directly  across  Franklin  Street,  west  of 
the  Opera  House  and  the  Veterans  Memorial  Building. 

6.  The  total  estimated  project  cost  of  the  rehabilitation,  modernization  and 
expansion  of  the  War  Memorial  Cultural  Center  will  require  a  bond  issue 
of  $29,  000,000. 

7.  The  sums  required  for  the  rehabilitation  and  modernization  of  the  Veterans 
Building,  when  added  to  those  necessary  for  essential  physical  expansion 
of  the  production  and  performance  activities  of  the  Opera,  Symphony  and 
Ballet,  are  such  that  a  general  obligation  bond  issue,  reflected  in  the 
above  estimates  of  cost,  seems  essential  to  finance  the  project. 

8.  The  rehabilitation  and  modernization  of  the  Veterans  Memorial  Building  and 
the  new  Musical  Arts  building  should  be  carried  out  simultaneously  as  soon 
as  possible  if  San  Francisco  is  to  maintain  its  present  position  of  leadership 
in  the  musical,  performing  and  fine  arts,  and  if  the  San  Francisco  War 
Memorial  is  to  continue  to  remain  a  cultural  center  as  well  as  the  home  of 
San  Francisco's  veterans*  organizations. 


XI.  APPENDICES 

Appendix  A 
Appendix  B 


I 
I 
I 
1 

1 
1 


APPENDIX  "A" 


War  Memorial  Opera  House  and  Veterans'  Building 
Rehabilitation  and  Modernization 


Deficiencies,  Recommendations  and  Outline  Specifications 


It  is  recommended  that  repairs,  replacement,  and  new  construction  be  accom- 
plished at  least  to  the  extent  outlined  in  the  following: 

A.  Veterans'  Building 


1 )  Roof  repair. 


Problem:     The  original  installation  of  lead-coated,  standing  seam 
copper  was  made  without  regard  for  thermal  expansion  in  certain 
areas,  notably  ridges,  valleys,  gutters,  and  cap  flashings. 

Recommendation:     Replace  all  deficient  areas  with  new  work, 
properly  installed  and  provided  with  expansion  joints. 


2)  Glass  skylights. 


Problem:     Glazing  has  repeatedly  leaked  at  metal  to  glass  joints; 
condensate  gutters  and  leaders  are  rusted. 

Recommendation:     Remove  and  replace  all  glass  panels  and  metal 
frames  as  required,  re -installation  to  be  done  in  accordance  with 
modern  practice.      Replace  metal  condensate  system  with  non- 
corrosive  material. 


3)  Loggia  off  Green  Room. 

Problem:  Extensive  cracks  in  the  quarry  tile  deck  and  stains  on 
the  plaster  ceiling  in  the  entrance  vestibule  below  indicate  that 
the  membrane  is  leaking. 

Recommendation:     Replace  existing  membrane  with  new  and  re-lay 
or  replace  quarry  tile.      Replace  flashings  as  required. 

4)  Vibration  caused  by  motors,  fans,  and  ductwork. 

Problem:     For  some  time  complaints  have  been  made  regarding 
fan  noise  throughout  the  Auditorium,  particularly  the  stage  area. 


1 


Recommendation:     Investigation  has  revealed  that  fans  and  motors 
throughout  the  building  are  mounted  on  cork  which  is  ineffectual 
in  damping  vibration  and  that  this  vibration  is  being  transmitted 
to  a  number  of  areas  in  the  form  of  noise.     Further,  it  was 
found  that  ducts,  while  isolated  from  the  fans  with  canvas  bellows, 
nevertheless  are  imparting  vibrations  to  walls  into  which  many  of 
the  ducts  are  solidly  embedded.     Finally,  in  the  case  of  the 
Auditorium  stage,  air  is  exhausted  to  the  outside  directly  above 
the  smoke  doors  opening  from  the  top  of  the  fly  gallery.     It  is 
possible  that  some  of  the  noise  observed  below  originates  here. 

It  is  recommended  that  noise  elimination  be  done  progressively: 

a)  Install  spring  isolators  and  inertia  pads  under  all  motors  and 
fans,  including  the  convertors  over  Elevators  #1  and  #2. 

b)  Isolate  ductwork  from  walls  in  fan  room  areas  with  non- 
hardening  mastic. 

c)  Treat  ducts  to  plenum  over  Auditorium  acoustically. 

d)  Redesign  exhaust  ductwork  above  stage  in  order  to  eliminate 
air  noise. 

It  may  not  be  necessary  to  do  all  items  in  order  to  reduce  noise  to 
an  acceptable  level. 

5)  Cast  stone  in  main  floor  entrance  areas. 

Problem:     Shrinkage,  vibration,  earthquakes,  and  building  settle- 
ment have  caused  opening  of  mortar  joints  between  the  cast  stone 
veneer  blocks. 

Recommendation:     Rake  all  joints  with  power  tools  to  depths  of 
about  1/2"  and  repoint  with  mortar. 

6)  Plaster  cracks,  corridors,  and  stairs. 

Problem:     Plaster  cracks  have  developed  in  these  areas,  to  some 
extent  on  the  walls  but  particularly  in  the  vaulted  ceilings. 

Recommendation:     The  nature  of  the  observed  cracks  is  considered 
to  be  what  might  be  called  normal  for  buildings  of  this  age.  Fill 
cracks  and  repaint. 


2 


Acoustic  treatment  -  Room  134. 


Problem:     Surfaces  in  this  room  are  all  hard  finish  with  the  result 
that  reverberation  tends  to  make  speech  unintelligible. 

Recommendation:     Apply  1/2"  or  3/4"  mineral  acoustic  tile  on 
1"  x  3"  wood  stripping  on  the  north,  south,  and  west  walls  from 
the  ceiling  down  to  door  height.     Install  a  suspended  hard  sur- 
face reflector  approximately  8'-0"  wider  and  longer  than  the 
present  conference  table  at  a  height  of  12' -0"  above  the  floor. 

Basement  recreation  rooms. 

Problem:     There  are  two  recreation  rooms  existing  which  are 

suitable  for  dances  and  other  assemblies.      One,  at  the  east,  was 
originally  a  meeting  room;  the  other,  on  the  south,  has  been  re- 
modeled from  two  band  practice  rooms.      Ventilation  in  both  areas 
is  not  satisfactory;  lighting  is  adequate  but  not  attractive;  floors 
are  resilient  tile  which  is  not  completely  suitable  for  dancing  and 
both  areas  should  be  redecorated. 

Recommendation:     Modify  existing  ventilating  systems,  add  new 
booster  coils  in  existing  ductwork  (including  controls  and  connec- 
tions to  present  steam  piping;  relocate  return  grilles  with  replace- 
ment as  required.  )  -  Install  new  acoustic  ceilings,  replace  finish 
floors  with  wood,  provide  new  lighting  with  dimmer  control  and 
redecorate  walls. 

Rehabilitation  of  Elevators. 

a)  Art  Museum  sidewalk  elevator  (#6) . 

Problem:     Necessity  for  door  opening  in  excess  of  platform  size 
has  created  a  potentially  dangerous  condition  which  requires  re- 
moval of  a  steel  beam  in  order  to  open  all  four  sidewalk  doors. 
Further,  the  overhang  beyond  the  elevator  platform  of  some 
objects  makes  handling  unsafe. 

Recommendation:    Install  a  new  elevator  with  platform  of  size  to 
suit  doors;  provide  two  doors  which  open  normally  and  safely. 

b)  Elevator  #4  (Museum  freight) . 

General  overhaul,  but  not  complete  rehabilitation. 


c)     Elevator  #3  (Museum  passenger)  and  #1  and  #2  (Veterans'  passenger). 


Problem:     Controls  are  antiquated;  doors  are  worn;  cabs  do  not 
have  doors. 

Recommendation:   Modernize  controls,  type  to  suit  use;  provide 
new  cabs  and  doors. 

10)  Acoustic  treatment  and  lighting  -  Art  Museum  Rotunda. 

Problem:     The  floor  and  wall  materials  in  this  room  are  such  that 
sound  reverberation  is  extremely  annoying.    Present  artificial 
lighting  consists  of  four  bare  light  bulbs. 

Recommendation:   That  the  plan  proposed  to  the  Department  of 
Public  Works  in  1958  be  carried  out  in  order  to  effect  proper 
lighting  and  acoustic  treatment. 

1 1 )  Redesign  of  Art  Museum,  receiving  and  storage  space;  re-allocation 
of  offices  and  teaching  areas. 

Problem:   At  present  approximately  45,000  square  feet  of  total 
space  are  devoted  to  the  use  of  the  museum.      Of  this  9,  600 
square  feet  are  in  the  basement  and  are  primarily  used  for 
receiving,  carpentry,  and  storage. 

Some  19,400  square  feet  are  utilized  as  exhibition  areas  with 
the  remaining  15,000  square  fe'et  being  used  for  offices,  educa- 
tional and  other  utilitarian  purposes. 

Artificial  lighting  in  the  galleries  is  extremely  poor;  acoustics 
are  bad;  the  nature  of  the  wall  structure  creates  a  constant  source 
of  dust. 

Humidity  control  and  air  cooling  are  non-existent.      Much  of  the 
total  so-called  gallery  area  is  made  up  of  corridors  which  are 
not  suitable  for  exhibition  space. 

Office  space  is  inadequate,  poorly  arranged,  and  inefficient. 

Probably  the  least  effective  area  is  in  the  basement.     It  is, 
roughly,  50%  of  the  size  considered  by  modern  museum  standards 
to  be  necessary  for  proper  functioning. 

Spacial  relationships  in  the  basement  area  are  such  that  proper 


4 


I 


flow  of  materials  is  not  possible;  hence  operations  are  slow  and 
there  is  constant  danger  to  the  works  of  art  which  are  handled. 
The  spaces  are  sprinklered  rather  than  protected  with  a  non- 
damaging  smoke  detection  system.      Constant  security  control 
does  not  exist. 

Recommendation:     The  entire  museum  operation  should  be  studied 
carefully  and  in  detail  to  determine  the  best  possible  utilization 
of  space.     However,  the  following  changes  are  minimal: 

a)  Remove  virtually  all  walls  on  the  fourth  floor  with  the  excep- 
tions of  the  Rotunda  and  stairs. 

b)  Install  new  walls  to  divide  the  area  into  four  galleries  with 
restrooms,  kitchen,  and  book  store. 

c)  Install  new  ceilings  throughout  with  the  ability  to  provide  both 
natural  and  artificial  light. 

d)  Install  new  floor  finish  throughout. 

e)  Provide  air  conditioning,  electronic  smoke  detection  and 
closed  TV  security  systems  in  the  galleries. 

f)  Revise  administrative  offices,  curatorial  offices,  educational 
facilities,  staff  lounge,  board  room,  and  mailing  rooms. 

g)  Shops  and  storage  -  provide  shop  and  storage  space  in  the 
basement  properly  designed  to  serve  as  an  integrated  series 
of  functioning  areas.    Include  a  vault  for  painting  storage  and 
electronic  security  and  fire  detection  system. 

h)  Redesign  ground  floor  entrance.    Add  new  elevator  for  passen 
gers. 

12)  Auditorium. 

Problem:     Discussion  with  a  number  of  authorities  of  varied  inter- 
ests and  our  own  observations  have  led  to  the  following  conclu- 
sions : 

a)        Seating  on  the  orchestra  floor  is  uncomfortable,  antiquated, 

and  unsightly.      Continuance  of  the  use  of  the  movable  feature 
of  the  floor  prevents  the  installation  of  modern,  permanent 
seating. 


5 


It  has  been  found  that  the  cost  of  handling  the  present  seating 
and  attendant  items  is  becoming  prohibitive  so  that  use  of  the 
floor  in  the  level  position  seems  unwarranted. 

b)  Ventilation  is  poor  and  what  there  is  creates  unpleasant  drafts 
which  are  distracting  and  uncomfortable. 

c)  Present  decor  is  depressing  and  somewhat  overpowering. 

d)  House  lighting,  while  perhaps  adequate  is  not  aesthetically 
inspiring. 

e)  Modernization  of  stage  lighting  and  dimmer  control  is  essen- 
tial. 

f)  Re -rigging  and  re -draping  of  the  stage  is  required. 

Recommendation:     The  complete  redesign  of  the  Auditorium  and 
modernization  of  the  stage  facilities  to  produce  a  completely 
satisfactory  permanent  Auditorium  for  1,050  seat  capacity  in- 
cluding : 

a)  Redesign  entire  interior  of  audience  area  to  improve  acous- 
tics and  appearance  using  new  finish  materials. 

b)  Install  permanent  seats  in  orchestra;  replace  seats  in  balcony. 
This  means  abandonment  of  the  movable  feature  of  the  orches- 
tra floor.     Total  number  of  seats:  1,050. 

c)  Re-curtain  stage. 

d)  Replace  all  stage  rigging  as  required. 

e)  Install  new  main  switchboard;  replace  dimmer  board  with 
modern  dimmers  and  control;  provide  a  complete  new  com- 
pliment of  stage  lights. 

f)  Revise  ventilating  system  to  improve  air  circulation  and 
eliminate  drafts. 

g)  Design  and  install  new  house  lighting. 

h)  Install  new  carpet  in  lobbies,  stairs,  and  on  orchestra  and 
balcony  aisles. 


6 


B.  Items  which  are  common  to  both  the  Opera  House  and  Veterans' 


Building. 


1)  Air  filters  in  ventilating  systems. 

Problem:     Present  filters  do  not  properly  fit  frames  and  are  expen^ 
sive  to  replace.     As  a  result  some  filters  are  blown  out  by  air 
pressure  with  attendant  infiltration  of  dust;   cost  of  replacement 
in  the  past  has  prolonged  use  so  that  clogged  filters  reduce  venti- 
lation efficiency. 

Recommendation:     Install  replaceable  media  filters  which  have 
easily  replaced  pads. 

2)  Settlement  of  sidewalks  and  central  court. 

Problem:     Certain  portions  of  the  public  sidewalks  and  approaches 
to  the  buildings,  notably  at  the  northeast  and  southeast  corner  of 
the  War  Memorial  complex,  as  well  as  part  of  the  Opera  House 
taxi  ramp  and  the  central  court,  have  settled,  creating  uneven 
surfaces  and  cracks. 

It  is  not  possible  to  determine  exactly  the  cause  of  this  without 
removal  of  the  surface  treatment  and  examination  of  the  sub- 
surface material.      However,   soil  borings  made  at  the  time  of 
construction  indicate  that  the  material  is  fine  sand  and  it  is 
believed  that  settlement  has  resulted  from  consolidation  resulting 
from  water  seepage  and  vibration. 

Recommendation:     Remove  the  affected  portions  of  walks  and  other 
surface  coverings,  including  the  sub- surface  material  to  a  depth 
to  be  determined,  and  replace  with  engineered  fill.  Reinstall 
the  surface  finish.     At  the  time  of  removal,  detailed  inspection 
and  a  more  accurate  evaluation  of  the  problem  can  be  made. 

C.  Opera  House. 

1)  Roof  repair. 

The  problem  and  recommended  treatment  is  identical  with  that  of 
the  Veterans'  Building  as  discussed  under  A.   1)  above. 

2)  Cast  stone  in  main  floor  entrance  and  lobby. 

The  problem  and  recommendations  are  the  same  as  those  described 
under  Veterans'  Building,  A.  5)  above. 


7 


3)  Plaster  throughout  the  corridors,  stairwells,  and  promenades. 


Problem:     Extensive  and  unsightly  cracks  have  appeared  through- 
out these  areas  on  walls  in  particular.      The  cause  appears  to  be 
a  combination  of  shrinkage,  settlement,  and  minor  earthquakes. 

Recommendation:     Fill  major  cracks;  apply  canvas  and  two  coats 
of  paint. 

4)  Wind  screens  -  taxi  and  carriage  entrances. 

Problem:     Wind  and  rain  protection  is  needed  on  the  north  and 
south  sides  of  the  building  to  alleviate  present  conditions  which 
make  entry  and  exit  to  and  from  the  building  from  vehicles  un- 
pleasant. 

Recommendation:     Construct  glass  screens  in  metal  frames  be- 
tween the  doorways  extending  vertically  to  a  height  of  about  ten 
feet  and  horizontally  from  the  building  to  points  near  the  edges 
of  the  walks  in  such  a  way  that  they  will  not  interfere  with  traffic. 

5)  Complete  screen  between  lobby  and  foyer,  main  floor. 

Problem:     The  presence  of  open  spaces  above  the  existing  metal 
framed  glass  and  doors  in  the  five  arched  spaces  between 
columns  which  occur  between  the  lobby  and  the  foyer  permit  the 
passage  of  drafts  from  the  outside  to  the  foyer. 

Recommendation:     Install  glass  in  frames  to  match  existing  in  such 
a  way  that  the  lobby  is  completely  sealed  from  the  foyer. 

6)  Acoustic  treatment  of  refreshment  areas. 

Problem : 

a)  The  noise  level  caused  by  conversation  and  other  sources, 
particularly  during  program  intermissions  is  excessive  due, 
primarily,  to  the  lack  of  soft  surfaces  in  the  following  re- 
freshment areas:  Lower  Foyer  Bar  ;  Mezzanine  Bar;  Third 
Floor  Bar. 

b)  In  addition,  noise  emanating  from  the  Lower  Foyer  Bar  passes 
through  the  plaster  ceiling,  into  the  under-orchestra  air 
plenum  and  through  the  orchestra  air  supply  openings.  The 
noise  is  disturbing  to  patrons  during  intermissions. 


8 


Recommendation : 

a)  Treat  the  ceilings  of  the  three  affected  areas  with  acoustic 
materials,   such  as  3/4"  mineral  tile,  applied  either  directly 
or  on  wood  battens. 

b)  Install  a  1"  thick  plaster  barrier  wall  and  2"  glass  fiber 
blanket  above  the  ceiling  over  the  Lower  Foyer  Bar  up  to  the 
ground  floor  concrete  slab.    Add  1"  thick  plaster  to  the  hollow 
tile  wall  between  the  bar  and  the  under-orchestra  plenum. 

7)  Revisions  to  liquor  and  soft  drink  concessions. 

Problem : 

a)  Lower  Foyer  Bar.      With  the  present  arrangement  this  bar  is 
always  overcrowded,  service  is  inefficient  and  facilities  for 
table  service  are  inadequate.      Discussion  with  the  concession- 
aire indicates  that  the  position  of  certain  columns  with  respect 
to  the  bar  and  the  tendency  of  patrons  to  attempt  to  obtain  serv- 
ice toward  the  center  bar  rather  than  near  the  ends,  consti- 
tutes an  ineffective  operation.      See  also  Item  C.  8)  below. 

b)  Mezzanine  and  Third  Floor  Bars.      Both  of  these  facilities 
are  inadequate  in  size  and  efficiency. 

c)  Present  soft  drink  and  candy  concessions  are  unsightly  make- 
shift areas  which,  if  improved  and  supplemented,  could 
actually  decrease  the  load  upon  and  improve  the  revenue  from 
the  liquor  bars. 

Recommendation: 

a)  In  the  Lower  Foyer  Bar,  construct  a  new,  straight  bar  to  the 
west  of  and  backed  by  the  portion  which  now  separates  the 
access  corridor  to  the  rest  rooms  from  the  present  table  area. 
The  existing  bar  to  be  removed  and  the  space  in  the  "alcove" 
to  be  used  for  table  service. 

b)  Construct  new  lengthened  bars  to  replace  those  on  the  Mez- 
zanine and  Third  floors.      In  redesigning  all  bars  the  space 
from  front  to  back  to  be  substantially  reduced  to  between  five 
and  six  feet  for  increased  efficiency  in  this  particular  opera- 
tion. 


9 


c)        Soft  drink  and  candy  concessions. 


(1) 


The  Lower  Foyer  counter  to  be  designed  to  blend 
aesthetically  with  the  surrounding  area,  enclosed 
from  floor  to  ceiling  and  made  capable  of  being 
locked. 


(2) 


Convert  the  two  centrally  located  check  rooms  (one 
on  the  north;  one  on  the  south)  into  soft  drink  and 
candy  bars.    This  to  be  done  by  installing  counters 
and  overhead  rolling  doors. 


(3) 


Convert  the  two  check  rooms  adjacent  to  the  present 
bar  on  the  third  floor  into  soft  drink  booths  as  in  (2) 
above. 


It  should  be  noted  that  none  of  the  check  rooms  mentioned  are 
used  to  capacity  and,  in  fact,  some  are  not  used  at  all. 


Restaurant. 


Problem:     In  at  least  three  of  the  many  interviews  with  interested 
persons  held  during  this  survey,  mention  was  made  of  the  de- 
sirability of  restaurant  service  in  the  house.      The  need  for  this 
is  two  fold: 


Recommendation:    Food  service  for  non-public  use  will  be  pro- 
vided in  the  proposed  Musical  Arts  Building.     It  is  obvious  that 
no  space  of  sufficient  size  for  exclusive  use  as  a  restaurant  can 
be  found  in  the  Opera  House  itself. 

The  recommendation  below,  made  after  consultation  with  the 
present  concessionaire,  is  dependent  upon  execution  of  the 
changes  in  the  Lower  Foyer  Bar  suggested  under  Item  7)  above 
and  involves  dual  use  of  tables  in  the  "alcove"  thus  created. 

Proper  and  efficient  service  of  prepared  food  before  performances 
to  be  made  by  the  construction  of  a  pantry  in  the  under- orchestra 
plenum  immediately  behind  the  present  bar.     Such  construction 
to  be  done  in  a  manner  which  would  insure  complete  sound  isola- 
tion of  the  pantry  from  the  orchestra  seating. 


a) 


Service  for  the  public. 


b) 


Service  for  the  "behind  scenes"  personnel. 


10 


9) 


Rehabilitate  existing  heating  controls. 


Problem:     In  general  the  original  system  is  in  excellent  condition. 
Certain  specific  items  should  be  replaced;  some  areas  should  be 
rezoned  because  partition  changes  have  altered  the  original 
intent  of  operation. 

Recommendation:     Replace  air  compressors  and  tanks;  replace 
certain  thermostats;  re-zone  certain  areas,  providing  thermo- 
stats and  reheat  coils  as  required. 

10)  Rehabilitation  of  elevators. 

a)  Passenger  elevators  #1  and  #2. 

Problem:     Controls  are  antiquated  and  costly  to  maintain;  cabs 
and  doors  are  old;  doors  operate  on  air  rather  than  modern 
electric  master  controls. 

Recommendation:     Replace  controls  with  Selective  Collective  Sys- 
tem which  can  also  be  operated  by  attendants.     Replace  doors 
and  controls.     Refinish  cab  interiors.     An  overtime  allowance 
should  be  made  to  reduce  construction  time  to  a  minimum. 

b)  Freight  Elevator  (North  Stage  elevator  #4). 

Problem:     This  elevator  is  one  of  two  which  serve  the  stage  both 
for  passengers  and  freight.      At  present,  the  controls  are  diffi- 
cult to  maintain;  the  motor  is  two  speed  AC  which  results  in 
"jerky"  operation;  the  cab  and  doors  should  be  replaced.    If  the 
north  elevator  is  made  more  serviceable  it  will  relieve  some  of 
the  load  which  is  presently  placed  on  the  south  one,  particularly 
during  performances. 

Recommendation:     Modernize  this  elevator  by  replacing  the  cab, 
doors,  motor,  and  controls. 

c)  Passenger  Elevator  #3. 

This  elevator  is  adequate  in  capacity  in  its  present  state  but  is 
to  be  generally  overhauled. 

11)  Provide  "Green  Room". 

Problem:     There  is,  at  present,  no  adequate  room  or  area  where 
conductors  or  other  principals  can  receive  selected  patrons  after 
performances. 


1 1 


Recommendation:  •   On  the  main  floor  off  the  south  promenade  there 
is  a  room,  originally  intended  as  a  concession  booth,  which  is 
now  used  by  the  Board  of  Trustees.      Redecorate  this  room  to 
provide  an  1 1  by  27-foot  Green  Room. 

Opera  Museum. 

It  has  been  suggested  that  an  Opera  Museum  be  established  and 
that  for  the  present,  at  least,  the  Mezzanine  South  Promenade 
be  used  for  this  purpose. 

We  concur  with  this  use  and  recommend  that  displays  be  included 
in  the  cost  of  capital  improvements  and  the  Museum  be  exploited 
as  a  tourist  attraction. 

Music  Library 

Problem:     The  existing  music  library  is  no  longer  suitable  or 
adequate.      Both  the  Symphony  and  the  Opera  Associations  con- 
tinually increase  the  quantity  of  music  to  be  handled  and  stored. 
Actually,  the  library  in  a  sense,  could  be  considered. as  requir- 
ing two  basic  spaces.      One  might  be  termed  "dead  storage";  the 
other  a  working  library. 

Recommendation:     Space  for  the  principal  or  "dead  storage"  library 
with  work  space  as  needed  can  be  incorporated  in  the  Musical 
Arts  Building. 

It  is  anticipated  that  construction  of  this  new  building  will  re- 
lieve the  backstage  load  in  the  Opera  House  with  particular 
respect  to  the  dressing  rooms  to  the  extent  that  they  may  be  used 
for  other  purposes. 

It  is  proposed  that  a  proper  working  library  with  storage  and  sort 
ing  space  be  constructed  in  the  area  in  correct  relation  to  the  or- 
chestra playing  location  when  this  freeing  up  of  space  occurs. 
Such  a  library  would  primarily  be  designed  to  handle  music  for 
the  current  season,  the  larger  library  in  the  new  building  being 
basically  for  the  permanent  collection. 

Instrument  storage. 

Problem:     Storage  space  for  large  instruments  is  required  in  an 
area  near  the  playing  space  and  of  such  size  that  "live  storage" 
of  these  instruments  can  be  maintained  for  a  week  or  preferably 
a  season.    Additional  space  for  smaller  instruments  is  desirable 
but  would  be  in  the  Musical  Arts  Building. 


12 


Recommendation:  That  space  in  the  Opera  House  be  made  avail- 
able for  instrument  "live  storage"  under  the  same  conditions  as 
described  above  in  Item  13. 

Dressing  rooms  and  showers. 

Problem:     Dressing  room  space  and  shower  facilities  are  hope- 
lessly insufficient  for  any  production  which  requires  the  use  of 
choral  and  supernumerary  groups.      At  present,  there  are  only 
four  showers  for  women  and  two  for  men. 

Recommendation:   Until  the  Musical  Arts  Building  is  constructed, 
at  which  time  the  load  on  the  Opera  House  will  be  relieved,  it  is 
possible  to  provide  space  for  two  (2)  new  showers  for  women  and 
four  (4)  for  men. 

It  is  anticipated  that  the  present  space  in  the  Opera  House  can  be 
re-allocated  to  suit  the  needs  of  principals,  musicians,  and  other 
persons  who  require  close  proximity  to  the  stage.      This,  of 
course,  cannot  be  accomplished  until  the  new  building  is  construct 
ed,  also  the  temporary  use  of  dressing  rooms  in  the  Veterans' 
Building  should  be  considered. 

Re-rig  fly  gallery. 

Problem:     Much  of  the  stage  rigging  has  not  been  replaced  since  it 
was  installed  some  30  years  ago.    -  Such  items  as  brakes,  sheaves 
head  blocks  and  even  cables  and  ropes  are  in  this  category.  The 
existing  pin  rail  control  is  at  stage  level.      This  does  not  permit 
fly-men  to  view  the  stage  action  area. 

Recommendation:   The  entire  installation  should  be  replaced.  The 
pin  rail  control  should  be  raised  to  a  level  which  provides  a 
direct  view  of  the  stage.      Since  it  is  not  possible  at  this  time  to 
determine  exactly  how  much  of  the  equipment  must  be  renewed, 
allowance  for  complete  replacement  has  been  made  in  the  cost 
estimates. 

Re-curtain  stage. 

Problem:     This  problem  is  two-fold.      The  contour  and  other  cur- 
tains have  served  for  the  life  of  the  building  and  have  deteriorated 
beyond  repair.      The  contour  curtain  motors  do  not  permit  proper 
variation  in  curtain  speed,  a  condition  which  detracts  from  the 
tempo  effect  of  many  productions.      The  other  problem  involves 


13 


the  original  design  position  of  several  items.  The  space  occu- 
pied by  the  contour  curtain  is  approximately  three  feet  up-down 
stage.     This  curtain  is  presently  upstage  from  the  fire  curtain. 

The  first  light  bridge  and  tormentor  towers  occupy  another  three 
to  four-feet,  again  upstage.     This  combination  results  in  the  loss 
of  six  to  eight  feet  of  extreme  downstage  play  area  which,  while 
for  Opera  may  have  less  importance,  is  vital  to  Ballet  and  Light 
Musical  productions. 

Recommendation : 

a)  Install  new  stage  curtains.     In  so  doing,  move  the  contour 
curtain  and  valance  into  the  proscenium  arch,  i.  e.  ,  down- 
stage from  the  fire  curtain.     Provide  modern  motors,  at 
least  ten,  and  new  controls  for  this  curtain  to  give  maximum 
flexibility. 

b)  Install  a  new  motorized  call  curtain  immediately  upstage  from 
the  fire  curtain. 

c)  Redesign  the  first  light  bridge  and  tormentors,  using  modern 
equipment. 

d)  Add  approximately  six  new  lines.     It  may  be  possible  to  add 
additional  lines  farther  upstage  if  the  borders  are  replaced. 

The  above  recommendations  will  add  several  feet  of  usable  down- 
stage critical  space. 

Stage  lighting  and  control. 

Problem:   Stage  lighting  equipment  and  its  control  have  advanced 
technically  since  1933  to  such  an  extent  that  the  original  instal- 
lation, still  in  use,  seems  almost  makeshift  and  the  rental  equip- 
ment available  for  use  in  San  Francisco  to  supplement  it  is  very 
little  better. 

a)        Inefficiency  of  overhead  lighting  results  in  the  necessity  of 

setting  the  teaser  so  low  that  in  many  productions  the  balcony 
audience  cannot  see  upstage  action. 

Paradoxically,  the  present  overhead  stage  lights  could  be 
replaced  by  lights  of  smaller  physical  size  and  increased  out- 
put, thereby  gaining  space  for  additional  rigging  sets. 


14 


1 


I 

1 


b)  The  position  of  the  first  light  bridge  prevents  lighting  of  the 
extreme  and  critical  downstage  area.     Refer  to  Item  17 
above. 

c)  Front  lighting  is  limited  to  the  inadequate  and  too  flat  orig- 
inal provision  in  the  front  of  the  Grand  Tier  rail.     At  times 
this  is  supplemented  by  temporary,  exposed  equipment  placed 
on  the  organ  loft  railings. 

d)  The  existing  dimmer  and  control  consists  of  three  components  - 
the  control  on  stage,  the  reactors  and  the  hydraulic  system 

for  operating  the  stage  control.    All  of  these  are  32  years  old. 

The  on- stage  control  is  some  25  feet  in  length,  will  hold  15 
presets  and  requires  considerable  ingenuity  as  well  as  agility 
to  operate.      No  direct  light  control  from  any  other  part  of 
the  House  is  possible. 

e)  The  deficiency  in  lighting  and  control  is  such  that  some 
Opera  performances,  among  them  Wagner's  Ring  Series, 
cannot  be  undertaken  in  the  Opera  House  because  of  them. 

Re  commendation : 

a)  Replace  the  main  electric  switchboard. 

b)  Install  a  modern  type  dimmer  with  sufficient  capacity  to  not 
only  accommodate  present  needs,  but  also  those  of  a  careful 
projection  of  future  requirements.     In  so  doing,  install 
matching  controls,  pre -set  and  patch  panels  on  stage.  Install, 
duplicate  controls  in  the  projection  booth  so  that  adjustments 
in  lighting  can  be  made  directly  at  a  proper  distance. 

c)  Re-wire  and  re-equip  the  entire  stage  with  up-to-date  light- 
ing facilities. 

d)  Add  front  lighting  in  the  upper  balcony  rail  and  in  the  organ 
loft  grilles.     The  latter  will  be  replaced  with  a  design  more 
in  scale  with  the  adjacent  architecture. 

e)  Add  additional  lighting  above  the  oval  ceiling  at  the  east  edge. 

f)  Replace  the  down  lights  above  the  proscenium  with  equipment 
which  can  be  masked  from  the  view  of  the  orchestra  audience. 


15 


g)        All  of  the  above  must  be  carefully  designed  with  the  profes- 
sional assistance  of  one  or  more  stage  lighting  consultants 
working  in  association  with  the  technical  personnel  of  the 
Opera,  Ballet,  and  Symphony  Associations  and  the  architects 
and  engineers. 

Replace  cycloramas. 

Problem:     The  "eyes"  require  replacement  because  of  age  and 
obsolescence.     Both  eyes  are  of  canvas  which  is  acoustically 
transparent.     This  not  only  permits  the  passage  of  some  street 
noise  but  also  results  in  loss  of  sound  from  the  stage  to  the  up- 
stage wings. 

Recommendation:     Replace  the  "eye  with  fabric.  Replace 
the  other  "cyc"with  acoustically  opaque  material.  Motorize 
both  cycloramas. 

House  lighting. 

Problem:     The  house  lighting  in  general  is  keyed  too  low  and 
should  be  increased,  either  within  the  existing  fixtures  or  with 
new  fixture s. 

Recommendation:     Design  study  from  technical  and  artistic  points 
of  view  to  the  end  that  the  rehabilitated  Opera  House  will  have 
proper  lighting  consistent  with  its  purpose  and  its  fine  architec- 
ture. 

Stage  traps  and  bridges 

Problem:     Discussions  have  been  had  with  the  technical  director 
concerning  the  utility  of  the  existing  stage  floor  construction. 
From  upstage  to  about  center  there  is  a  series  of  so-called 
traps  which  are  divisions  of  understage  floor  designed  in  such  a 
way  that  each  one  or  all  can  be  raised  to  produce  one  or  more 
elevated  platforms. 

From  center  to  downstage  there  is  a  series  of  four  bridges,  each 
approximately  four  feet  wide  by  50  feet  long,  separated  by  beams 
which  are  10",  more  or  less,  wide.     Hinged  platforms  are  at- 
tached to  the  downstage  edge  of  each.     These  bridges  may  be 
raised  or  lowered  and,  by  means  of  the  hinged  platforms,  caused 
to  form  a  sloping  stage. 

The  entire  system  was  evidently  designed  to  be  useful  for  many 


16 


types  of  productions  but,  in  fact,  at  least  for  Opera,  has  proven 
to  present  such  lack  of  versatility  that  it  is  seldom  used. 

One  reason  is  that  the  traps  can  be  raised  only,  not  depressed. 
Another  is  that  the  bridges  are  separated  by  the  beams  and,  hence, 
cut  the  downstage  area  into  "ribbons". 

Recommendation:    Greater  flexibility  should  be  achieved  by  removal 
of  the  beams  between  the  bridges  and  redesigning  the  entire  sys- 
tem, including  a  sliding  floor  which  could  be  in  place  when  the 
bridges  are  down.     With  this  system,  particularly  if  it  were  ex- 
tended over  the  entire  playing  area,  scenes  could  be  set  and  low- 
ered so  that  as  many  as  three  scenes  could  be  played  in  quick 
succe  ssion. 

There  are  numerous  other  uses  to  which  such  an  arrangement 
could  be  put. 

Closed  Circuit  T.  V. 

Problem:     At  present  one  camera  is  targeted  on  the  conductor;  the 
other  on  the  stage  from  the  projection  booth.     One,  or  at  most, 
two  monitors  are  used  on  stage.      The  latter  does  not  provide 
sufficient  coverage,  particularly  in  productions  requiring  certain 
types  of  choral  and  ballet  groups. 

Recommendation:    Install  plug-in.  connections  for  two  additional 
cameras  in  the  balcony  area.      Provide  four  monitors  each  side 
in  the  stage  wings  with  the  ability  to  use  one  or  more  upstage, 
center. 

Install  monitors  in  the  major  dressing  rooms  in  the  Opera  House. 

Install  monitors  in  the  proposed  Musical  Arts  Building  in  the 
lounges,  dressing  rooms,  offices,  and  other  key  locations. 

Air  conditioning. 

Problem:     Under  certain  conditions,  which  are  relatively  infre- 
quent, the  temperature  of  the  outside  air  is  such  that  with  the 
present  ventilating  system  any  incidental  cooling  effect  is  not 
satisfactory.     This  is  of  importance  primarily  in  the  audience 
areas  of  the  house  and  is,  of  course,  less  satisfactory  in  the  bal- 
conies than  below. 


17 


Recommendation:     Chillers  for  cooling  in  both  the  Opera  House  and 
Art  Museum  must  be  placed  in  the  Musical  Arts  Building  because 
there  is  no  suitable  space  elsewhere.    Cooling  in  the  Opera  House 
will  be  limited  to  those  areas  which  can  be  supplied  with  a  mini- 
mum of  damage  to  existing  finish.    No  extensive  demolition  and 
replacement  of  material  in  order  to  gain  installation  space  for 
ducts  is  contemplated. 

Orchestra  pit  and  prompter's  box. 

Problem:   By  far,  the  most  mentioned  single  item  of  deficiency 
which  has  come  to  our  attention  is  the  orchestra  pit.    A  few  of 
the  problems  are:    it  will  scarcely  hold  seventy  musicians,  one 
hundred  being  required  at  times;  the  shape  is  wrong,  being  too 
narrow  at  the  ends;   the  strings  are  weak  and  the  brass  is  strong; 
there  is  one  level  only  which  is  at  all  acoustically  acceptable  -  if 
the  orchestra  is  lowered  it  becomes  stronger,  if  raised,  weaker. 

While  not  part  of  the  pit  problem,  the  hood  over  the  prompter's 
box  is  raised  above  stage  level  and  should  be  lowered.. 

Recommendation:     Incorporate  all  or  part  of  the  movable  portion 
of  the  extreme  front  of  the  orchestra  floor  into  the  orchestra  pit. 
This  would  delete  38  seats  if  one  row  is  involved;  76  if  two  rows 
are  removed. 

These  losses  could  be  recovered  if  new  seating  is  installed.  (See 
Item  25  below.  ) 

As  part  of  the  construction  work  in  modifying  the  pit,  the 
prompter's  box  can  be  dropped. 

Replace  seating. 

Problem:     Upholstery  is  badly  worn  and  uncomfortable;  orchestra 
seats  are  unnecessarily  bulky;  soft  backs  are  thought  to  detract 
from  acoustics.    Additional  revenue  from  increased  seating  is 
badly  needed. 

Recommendation:     Replace  all  seats. 

No  capacity  increase  can  be  gained  in  any  area  except  the  orches- 
tra.   The  present  spacing  of  orchestra  seats  is  36".    By  using 
33-1/2"  a  total  gain  in  capacity  of  176  seats  can  be  had  which  will 
be  reduced  to  100  net  if  the  orchestra  pit  is  enlarged. 


18 


In  order  to  respace  the  orchestra  seats  it  will  be  necessary  to 
relocate  the  air  supply  openings  known  as  "mushrooms"  and  to 
modify  the  wood,  stepped  floor. 

Wiring  for  aisle  lights  will  have  to  be  replaced  in  order  to  ac- 
commodate row  respacing. 

Additional  boxes  and  modification  to  Grand  Tier. 

While  no  particular  problem  as  such  is  noted  we  see  the  possibility 
of  adding  one  tier  of  boxes  over  the  present  A  through  E  and  V 
through  Z  boxes  and  of  filling  the  north  and  south  ends  of  the  Grand 
Tier  level  to  bring  the  front  rail  out  to  match  the  line  of  the  present 
box  level. 

If  this  proves  to  be  structurally  and  economically  sound  after  de- 
tailed structural  and  cost  studies  beyond  the  scope  of  this  survey, 
it  would  add  ten  boxes  and  an  undetermined  number  of  Grand  Tier 
seats. 

A  conservative  estimate  of  the  annual  gross  revenue  which  could 
be  derived  from  ten  boxes,  assuming  six  seats  each,  is  between 
$35,000  and  $40,000. 

Symphony  Association  Offices. 

Problem:     At  present  the  space  occupied  by  this  Association  is  such 
that  efficient  functioning  is  impossible. 

Recommendation:     The  only  solution  which  is  at  all  practical  is 
the  inclusion  of  suitable  office  space  in  the  Musical  Arts  Building. 
If  it  is  desired  to  maintain  the  association  of  the  public  and  a  phy- 
sical tie  between  the  Symphony  offices  and  the  Opera  House  then, 
certainly,  a  portion  of  the  front  offices  may  remain  in  the  present 
quarters. 

Intercommunication  system. 

Problem:     Present  equipment  comprises  essentially  a  one-way  sys- 
tem which  depends  upon  disturbing  audibility  for  signals.    It  is 
not  possible  to  turn  off  speakers  when  desired  without  complete 
loss  of  contact  with  the  central  source. 

Recommendation:    Install  a  two-way  system  throughout  the  back- 
stage area  and  in  offices.     This  would  extend  to  the  Musical  Arts 
Building  as  required. 


19 


Such  a  system  would  have  other  than  sound  signals  so  that  persons 
on  stage  could  be  alerted  as  well  as  those  in  areas  where  broad- 
cast sound  can  be  used. 

Painting. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  audience  area  and  office  and  dressing 
room  spaces  be  painted.    In  so  doing  the  proscenium  can  be 
darkened  considerably  in  order  to  attain  a  more  suitable  setting 
for  the  stage  and  to  eliminate  undesirable  reflected  light. 


20 


APPENDIX  B 


SAN  FRANCISCO'S  WAR  MEMORIAL  CULTURAL  CENTER 
PRELIMINARY  ESTIMATE  OF  COST         1  February  1965 

A.    Rehabilitation  and  Modernization 
1 .     Veterans  Building 

Section  I  -  Architectural 


a. 

Copper  Roofing  Repair 

$  31,000 

b. 

Glass  Skylights 

90,000 

c . 

Loggia  off  Library- Lounge 

10,000 

d. 

Repair  Cast  Stonework 

23,000 

e. 

Acoustic  Treatment  Room  134 

2,500 

f. 

Recreation  and  Social  Activities  Rooms 

283,800 

g. 

Acoustical  Treatment  -  Museum 

14,800 

h. 

Auditorium  Modernization 

584,000 

i. 

Art  Museum  Redesign  and  Rehabilitation 

1,000,000 

$2,039,100 

Section  II  -  Vertical  Transportation 

a.    Rehabilitation-Redesign  of  Elevators        $  132,500 

$  132,000. 

Section  III  -  Mechanical 


a.  Air  Conditioning  Art  Museum 

b.  Air  Conditioning  Auditorium 

c.  Air  Conditioning  Recreation  and 
Social  Rooms 

Section  IV  -  Electrical 

a.  Auditorium  -  Main  Switchboard 
Dimmer  Lighting 

b.  Wiring  for  Air  Conditioning  System 


Subtotal 

General  Contractor's  Fee  -  10% 
Base  Cost 


$  282,200 
(incl.  above) 

(incl.  above) 


105,000 
10,000 


$  282,200 


$  115,000 
$2,568,800 

256,880 

$2,825,680 


-  2  - 


SAN  FRANCISCO'S  WAR  MEMORIAL  CULTURAL  CENTER 
PRE UMINARY  ESTIMATE  OF  COST         1  February  1965 

A.    Rehabilitation  and  Modernization  (continued) 

2.     Opera  House 

Section  I  -  Architectural 


a. 

Copper  Roofing  Repair  $ 

24,000 

b. 

Repair  Cast  Stone  Work 

36,000 

c. 

Plaster 

28,000 

d. 

Wind  Screen 

9,000 

e. 

Screen  between  Lobby  and  Foyer 

6,500 

f. 

Acoustic  Treatment-Refreshment  Area 

170,000 

g. 

Revisions  to  Concession  Areas 

35,000 

h. 

Restaurant 

I, ,500 

i. 

"Green  Room" 

2,500 

J. 

Re -rigging  of  Fly  Gallery 

55,000 

k. 

Re-curtain  stage 

105,000 

1. 

Cycloramas 

99,000 

m. 

Stage  Traps  and  Bridges 

500,000 

n  . 

Modification  and  Replacement  of  Seating 

327,270 

o. 

Additional  Boxes  and  Modifications  to 

Grand  Tier 

250,000 

P. 

Upper  Balcony  Extension 

5,000 

q. 

Sidewalk  and  Central  Court  Settlement 

15,000 

r. 

Repainting 

87.000 

Section  II  -  Vertical  Transportation 


$1 ,528,770 


Rehabilitate  Elevators 


Section  III  -  Mechanical 


$  162,850 


$  162,850 


a.  Rehabilitation  of  Existing  Heating 
Controls 

b.  Air  Filters  in  Ventilating  System 

c.  Air  Conditioning 

d.  Installation  of  Showers 


i  5,800 
3,610 
1,010,000 
11,000 


$1,030,410 


-  3  - 


SAN  FRANCISCO'S  WAR  MEMORIAL  CULTURAL  CENTER 
PRELIMINARY  ESTIMATE  OF  COST         1  February  1965 

A.     Rehabilitation  and  Modernization  (continued) 

2 .     Opera  House 

Section  IV  -  Electrical 


a . 

Stage  Lighting  and  Controls 

$  700,000 

b. 

Cyclorama  (wiring  only) 

15,000 

c. 

Stage  Traps  and  Bridges  (wiring  only) 

30,000 

d. 

Wiring  for  Air  Conditioning  System 

40,000 

e . 

Additional  Grand  Tier  Boxes 

6,000 

f. 

Closed  Circuit  TV  System 

30,000 

g. 

Inter-communication  System 

20,000 

h. 

Sound  Effects  System 

75,000 

i. 

Rewiring  Lighting  Power  Circuits 

50,000 

Subtotal 

General  Contractor's  Fee  -  10% 
Base  Cost 

Rehabilitation  and  Modernization  Estimate 

Veterans  Building  Base  Cost 
Opera  House  Base  Cost 

Total  Base  Cost 

Construction  Contingency  for  Field  Conditions  -  5% 
Fees,  etc. 

Department  of  Public  Works  2% 
Bond  Costs  1% 
Architects -Engineers  10% 
Contingency  Fund  for  Expected  Increase 

in  Construction  Costs  -  3  yrs .  @  4%  12% 
Contingency  Fund  for  Added  Overhead, 
Supervision,  Lost  Time  Due  to  Con- 
tinuous Occupancy  of  Buildings 


15% 


Total  Cost  of 

Rehabilitation  and  Modernization 


$  916,000 

$3,638,030 
363,815 
$4,001,845 


$2,825,680 
4,001,845 

$6,827,525 

341,375 

136,550 
68,275 
682,750 

819,300 


1,024,125 
$9,899,900 


-  4  - 


SAN  FRANCISCO'S  WAR  MEMORIAL  CULTURAL  CENTER 
PRELIMINARY  ESTIMATE  OF  COST         1  February  1965 

B.  New  Construction  -  Musical  Arts  Building 

1.  Opera,  Symphony,  Ballet,  Administration, 
Production  and  Rehearsal  Areas  and  2200- 
Seat  Hall  for  Public  Performances  of 
Ballet,  Incidental  Concerts  and  Recitals. 

Section  I  -  Architectural  $4,117,550 

Section  II  -  Vertical  Transportation  256,600 

Section  III  -  Mechanical  455,150 

Section  IV  -  Electrical  1,225,800 

Section  V  -  Special  Equipment  238,000 

$6,293,300 

2.  700-Car  Garage  .  4,318,150 

3.  Franklin  Street  Underpass  1  ,068,200 

Subtotal  $11,679,650 
General  Contractor's  Fee  -  10%  1  ,167,970 

Base  Cost  $12,847,620 

Construction-Contingency  for  Field  Conditions  -  5% , 

Fees,  etc.  642,380 

Department  of  Public  Works  2%  256,950 

Bond  Costs  1%  128,480 

Architects -Engineers  8%  1  ,027,800 
Contingency  for  Expected  Increase  in 

Construction  Costs,  3  yrs  .  @  4%  12%  1  ,541 ,720 

Total  of  New  Construction  $16,444,950 

Total  Construction  $26 , 344 ,  850 

C.  Land  2,625,000 

Total  Estimated  Project  Cost  $28 , 969  , 850 


Estimated  Bond  Issue  Required 


$29, 000,000 


-  5  - 


SAN  FRANCISCO'S  WAR  MEMORIAL  CULTURAL  CENTER 
PRELIMINARY  ESTIMATE  OF  COST         1  February  1965 

Recapitulation  of  Preliminary  Estimate  of  Cost 

A.  Rehabilitation  and  Modernization 

1.  Veterans  Building  $2,825,680 

2.  Opera  House  4,001 ,845 

Base  Costs  $6,827,525 

Contingencies  and  Fees  3  ,072,375 

Subtotal  $9,899,900 

B.  New  Construction  -  Musical  Arts  Building 

1.  Opera,  Symphony,  Ballet,  Administration,  $6,922,630 
Production  and  Rehearsal  Areas  and  2200- 

Seat  Hall  for  Public  Performances  of  Ballet 
Incidental  Concerts,  Recitals  and  Repertory  Groups 

2.  700-Car  Garage  $4,749,965 

3.  Franklin  Street  Underpass  $1  ,175,025 

Base  Costs  $12,847,620 

Contingencies  and  Fees  3  ,597,330 

Subtotal  -  New  Construction  $16,444,950 

Total  Construction  $26,344,850 

C.  Land  (88,300  square  feet  of  private  property)  2,625,000 

Total  Estimated  Project  Cost  $28,969,850 
Estimated  Bond  Issue  Required  $29,000,000 


XII.  PLATES 


Plate  1. 
Plate  2. 
Plate  3. 
Plate  4. 


HidON 


CO 

s  \ 

 <£  

m 

CO 

£ 

c 

: 

1 

1  1 

< 
_J 

Q_ 
DC 

o 
o 
_1 
u_ 


in 


< 

if) 

u_ 
o 


< 

o  ^ 

2  g 

UJ  X 

< 

<  a 

^  o 


j 


