Book No. ACCESSION 


224. 


| 720.5 Ar24 271273 
NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THE LIBRARY 


FORM No. 37 5М-8-32 


ТНЕ 
ARCHITECT 


AND 


ENGINEER 


OCTOBER 1932 


Obsolescence Insurance protects your building against Time and Wear and Tear 


NOBODY would mind seeing these three rogues out of work, for they 


mean no good. They are determined to mar the inner workings of your 
building and hamper its earning power. Counteract the work of the 
destructive three with Obsolescence Insurance! 

You will have to sell Obsolescence Insurance to yourself, for no 
insurance salesman is going to come around and do it for you. In 
other words, Obsolescence Insurance їз a fund you create by setting 
aside a small monthly sum from the income of your building. You 
then have your building inspected regularly and use this fund to renew 
its fixtures and finishes and operating units, all these things which 
quickly show traces of Time and Wear and Tear. 

You will find that the elevators are a most important item in insuring 
against obsolescence. For they are always in use and always in full 
view. Otis Elevator Company has anticipated your elevator needs and 
created two services which together keep elevators always modern and 
always in perfect working condition: (1) The Otis Modernization Plan, 
which calls for the complete overhauling of elevators and moderniza- 
tion to present-day standards; (2) The Otis Maintenance Service, which 
provides for regular, careful, competent elevator inspection and repair 
by Otis men. 

Otis offers a special Modernization Survey including a report as to 
needed elevator modernization and economical maintenance. This ser- 
vice is free and in no way obligates you. Just call your Otis office. 


Otis Elevator Company . . . offices in all principal cities. 


ОМЕ CONTROL 


JOHNSON Automatic Temperature 
Regulation Applied to Zone Control 


® Day and Night Thermostats, Clocks, and Switches may be аг- 
ranged in a wide variety of combinations for the control of 
branch heating mains serving various sections of the build- 
ing. Differential thermostats are available to maintain proper 


relationship between out-door and radiator temperatures. 


JOHNSON SERVICE COMPANY 
Main Office & Factory, Milwaukee, Wis. Branch Offices in all Principol Cities 


JOHNSON 


The illustrotion suggests Johnson apparatus for a typical Zone Control System. 


Control panel applies to a building having four zones. Zone control valve ond dual 


type thermostat for day and night operation ore indicated for one of the zones. 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 3 


Thumb Tacks and T- Square 


ТНЕ first of a series of etchings 
of Hoover Dam by Wm. Woollett of 
Los Angeles, appears as the Frontispiece 
this month. lts execution possesses that 
something so characteristic of this young 
man's work. The title of the drawing is 
"Suspension Bridge’, as scen looking to- 
ward the Arizona side. И is one of a 
dozen interesting views around the Ноо- 
ver Dain project which Mr. Woollett has 
cleverly reproduced in this medium. The 
series will be shown one or two at a 
time in successive issues of THE Авсні- 
ТЕСТ AND ENGINEER. 


Born in Albany, New York, thirty-one 
years ago, young Woollett received his 
early training in Berkeley, later gradu- 
ating in the School of Architecture at the 
University of Minnesota. Office training 
under Ludlow & Peabody, Alexander 
Trowbridge and James Gamble Rogers, 
all architects of renown, gave him a fine 
slant on his chosen profession. This train- 
ing. with the last seven years of practical 
work in the office of his father, Wm. Lee 
Woollett, has rounded out a splendid 
preparatory career for him. 


Woollett has exhibited his lithographs, 
etchings and sketches at the Los Angeles 
County Fair, Ebell Club, Friday Morn- 
ing Club, Assistance League, Plaza Art 
Centre, and Olympic Art Exhibit. An 
exhihition of his work will be held under 
the auspices of the California Society of 
Etchers, of which Mr. Woollett is a 
member, in San Francisco next month. 


ияи цн 


MOST business men believe clean- 
liness and orderliness are primary laws 
of efficient business operations. But how 
many put that belief into practice and 
make it pay dividends? Sometimes clean- 
liness is considered only in terms of floors, 
or desk tops, or flies, or personnel. And 
sometimes it surrounds and permeates a 
business institution and becomes oue of 
its big assets. 


The business world, as well as the buy- 
ing public, assumes a high standard of 
cleanliness for all food industries, but is 
frequently indifferent to the standards ap- 
plied in other industries. The public dis- 
regard of this situation is comprehensible; 
people rarely are interested where they 
are not directly affected. But the in- 
dustrialist, regardless of the nature of his 
product, has so much to gain from a thor- 
ough-going cleanliness program that neg- 
lect from him is hard to nnderstand. 


Personal and environmental cleanliness 
is tied up with employee health, morale 
and efficiency, aud these reflect themselves 
in lahor turnover, absenteeism, produc- 
tion, costs and accidents. It is not to be 
expected that a machinist, during his 
working hours, should be in the lily-white 
condition required of the department store 
salesman. The nature of his work makes 
this impossible; but his health protection 
demands pleuty of facilities for washing 
up before luuch and before he goes home 
at night. 


Plant managers, personnel directors, 
employee welfare workers and others 
who have formed effective ways to apply 
these privileges are, as a rule, quite will- 
ing to share their experiences. With a 
view to making some of this valuable in- 
formation more widely available, Cleanli- 
ness lustitute recently offered to pay 
Twenty-five Dollars for first-hand de- 
scriptions of the best cleanliness plans in 
actual and successful operation. 


One of these descriptive letters offers 
a graphic illustration of what a cleanli- 
ness campaign did for the American Roll- 
ing Mill Company, of Middletown, Ohio. 
"Accidents had been occurring with 
startling regularity. Safety talks, inspec- 
tions, and all known methods of preven- 
tion had been employed, but still acci- 
dents persisted," says Hugh Wright. sup- 
ervisor of Personnel Publications for the 
company. "One day oue of the foremen 
had an inspiration. He decided to have 
the cold roll men wear white pants in- 
stead of greasy overalls, the conventional 
uniform of the steel plant worker. Every- 
body laughed and joked about those cold 
roll dudes, that first morning the white- 
clad crew worked in their new uniforms, 
but somehow the idea iufected everyone 
in the big finishing department. The next 
moruing other white garbed workers 
punched the time clock, aud by the third 
day every man in the department was 
clad in spick and span white duck pants 
and white shirts. There were no more 
accidents in that department. Not that 
the white pants themselves prevented ac- 
cidents, but rather the worker garbed in 
white took every means to clean up his 
working place and exercised greater pre- 
cantions in keeping it clean. 


"Cleanliness and orderliness not only 
affect accidents, but they also exercise a 
powerful influence on the quality of prod- 
uct manufactured in the department or 
plant. Ít has been our experience that 
the departments which secure the high 


yields and have the best accident records 
are the cleanest departments." 


208 X 


LAST month we reprinted part of 
Ellis Lawrence's tribute to a rising young 
California delineator—Carl W. Heilborn. 
Au appreciative letter to the Editor from 
Mr. Heilborn bears the good news that 
ĀRCHITECT AND ENGINEER readers will 
soon be favored with a portfolio of some 
of the delineator’s recent work. Here is 
what he says: 


‘Mr. Lawrence writes that he is ar- 
ranging for an exhibition of my work in 
Portland. The Pencil Points’ illustrations 
were chosen from this group of some 
fifty drawings: so there are many more 
of equal merit to those appearing in Pen- 
cil Points and you may be interested in 
reproducing a few of these along with 
some of my newer things. 

“For quite some time I have had the 
desire, because of my appreciation of 
Mr. Lawrence's help and guidance, of 
doing a group of lithographs and etch- 
ings of the most outstanding buildings 
designed by his firm; these, perhaps to 
appear as a portfolio. I have written, re- 
cently, for Mr. Lawrence’s approval of 
the plan. 


"| am thinking seriously of locating in 
San Francisco as І am not quite satisfied 
with Los Angeles as a suitable sketching 
field for my particular architectural tastes. 
'The hilly nature; the rising skyline and 
the busy waterfront in San Francisco 
seems more inspiring to me than anything 
here." 

Very truly yours, 


“CARL W. HEILBORN." 


se se +9 
oe oe 24 


NORTHERN California Chapter, 
the American Institute of Architects, is to 
be congratulated in its selection of John 
J. Donovan as its president for the ensu- 
ing year. Mr. Donovan succeeds Henry 
H. Gutterson who filled the office ably 
the past year. Mr. Donovan has the 
reputation of doing things and he will 
undoubtedly be a big help to the Chapter 
in these trying times when every person 
and every organization needs a full meas- 
ure of enthusiasm and encouragement. 
Besides being an architect of renown, 
Mr. Donovan is a writer of no mean 
ability. A review of his latest contribu- 
tion to the profession on "School Build- 
ings and Their Equipment”, is published 
elsewhere in this issue. 


The Architect and Engineer. October, 1932 


ТНЕ 


eus ARCHITECT с 
AND ENGINEER 


NUMBER 1 


1932 


Cover Design 


Frontispicce 
11 
FREDERICK W. JONES, Editor 36 
EDGAR №. KIERULEF, 4557. Editor al 


Contributing Editors 
CLARENCE R. WARD, San Froncisco 43 


CARLETON MONROE WINSLOW, 34 
Los Angeles 

HAROLD W. DOTY, Portland, Ore. ы 

CHAS. Н. ALDEN, Seattle, Wash. 59 
Consulting and Advisory Editors 65 

]. HARRY BLOHME 

LEWIS P. HOBART 11-17 


TIMOTHY L. PFLUEGER 

ELMER GREY 

CLARENCE А. TANTAU 19 
WM. L. WOOLLETT 


JOHN J. DONOVAN 21-30 
JOHN BAKEWELL, JR. 

EDWIN L. SNYDER ‚ 31-35 
THOMAS J. KENT P 


ALBERT F. ROLLER 

7. STEWART FAIRWEATHER 

JOHN W. GREGG 

EMERSON KNIGHT 

CHAS. H. CHENEY 

W. ADRIAN 

JULIAN C. MESIC 

H. J. BRUNNIER 

L. H. NISHKIAN | 


@ his ©6755 ие 


SAN FRANCISCO SKYSCRAPERS 
Phota by Gabriel Moulin 


SUSPENSION BRIDGE. HOOVER DAM PROJECT 
An Etching by Wm. Woellett 


TEXT 


THE LINCOLN SHRINE AND TWO OTHER BUILDINGS 
Elmer Grey, Architect 


. ARCHITECTURE AND FINANCE—TAX THE SURPLUS 


William Lee Woollett, Architect 

SECURITY THROUGH PLANNING 

Hugh В. Pomeroy, Planning Advisor to San Mateo 
County Planning Commission 

COUNTY PLANNING IN CALIFORNIA 


PERMANENCE IN ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN 
By Thaddeus Joy, Architect 


. CONCRETE FOR HOOVER DAM 


W. В. Хебая, C. E. 


. AIR CONDITIONING RIGHT UP TO THE MINUTE 


H. L. Warren, Heating Engineer 
WITH THE ARCHITECTS 


PLATES AND ILLUSTRATIONS 


. THE LINCOLN SHRINE, REDLANDS 


Elmer Grey, Architect 


. RESIDENCE ОЕ CHAS. J. WILD, PASADENA 


Elmer Grey, Architect 


. STUDIO OF MRS. J. M. GOSS, PASADENA 


Elmer Grey, Architect 


. PORTFOLIO OF BUILDINGS FOR SCRIPPS COLLEGE, 


. 


CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 
Gordon B. Kaufmann, Sumner Hunt and S. R. Burns, Architects 


SANTA BARBARA SCHOOL FOR BOYS, CARPENTERIA, CALIFORNIA 
Reginald D. Johnson, Architect 


DRAWINGS ILLUSTRATING THE REPORT OF THE SAN MATEO 
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION 


ONGext Aonth 


H. A. MINTON, formerly architect for the Bank of America, contributes 
photographs, sketches and plans of some of his recent work, including bank 
buildings, schools and churches. 


The first of four interesting chapters of the early architectural practice 
of Elmer Grey of Los Angeles. The young practitioner will find an intimate 
appeal in Mr. Grey's articles. 

Another of Wm. Woollett’s graphic etchings of HOOVER DAM and the 


final chapter of Wm. L. Woollett’s scholarly essay on “Architecture and 
Finance" will constitute other leatures of the November number, 


MEME 1 10 01 
Published monthly by ТНЕ ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER, INC. 
1662 Russ Building, San Francisco, California 


W.J. L. KIERULFF, President ond Manager 


FRED'K. W. JONES, Vice-President L. B. PENHORWOOD, Secretary 


WILLIAM W. BRADFORD, Advertising Monager 


New York Representatiece— The Spencer Young Company, 299 Madison Ave., New York City 


Subscriptions—United States and Pan-American, $4.00 a year: single copy, $ .69. Canada and foreign countries, $6.00 a year. 


SUSPENSION BRIDGE, HO 
ETCHING BY WM. WOOLLETT 


ТНЕ 
ARCHITECT 
AND ENGINEER 


% "2-4 
371273 


OCTOBER 1932 
VOLUME 111 
NUMBER ONE 


THE LINCOLN SHRINE AND TWO 


OTHER BUILDINGS 


| HE Lincoln Shrine of 


Redlands, California, stands in the midst 
of a public park interspersed with numer- 
ous fine trees, including peppers, cedars 
and palms, whose sturdy trunks and bright 
green foliage form a lovely foil for the 
warm gray tones of its limestone walls. To 
residents and strang- 


+ 


ers alike it extends E: == 
an invitation to enter į, PI. 
its doors and be in- i C 


spired, not only by 
the works of fore- 
most American art- 
ists who have direct- 
ed their genius in 
praise of Lincoln, 
but even more, by 
the printed words 
of Lincoln himself 
which have been 
handed down as 
everlasting inspira- 
tion to mankind. 
The Shrine was 
presented to the City 
of Redlands by Mr. 


г 4 | 


ROUGH SKETCH FOR ADDITIONS TO LINCOLN 
SHRINE, REDLANDS, CALIFORNIA 


Elmer Grey, Architect 


by 
ELMER GREY А. |. А. 


and Mrs. Robert Watchorn, who built it to 
honor Lincoln and show forth his character 
as an ideal to follow, and also in memory of 
their son, Emory Ewart Watchorn, who 
made the supreme sacrifice in the World 
War. They chose Redlands as a location 
for it because of the beauty of the city and 
its surroundings and the unusual cultural 
quality of its citizens. They felt that the 
interest of these citi- 
zens was certain to 
make them reliable 
trustees of the Shrine 
for all time. In order 
that its placing and 
construction might 
be in thorough ac- 
cord with popular 
wishes, Mr. Watch- 
orn requested the 
formation of a com- 
mittee of representa- 
tive citizens to act 
as consultants and 
advisors. It was not 
hard to find those 
who were eminently 
qualified to serve in 
such capacity. Red- 


«ub» 


THE LINCOLN SHRINE, REDLANDS, CALIFORNIA 
ELMER GREY, ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 12 » OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


lands had had a considerable number of 
public benefactors in the past. They had 
given it a number of public parks of unus- 
ual beauty. a library building. additions to 
the library, an open-air theater and an en- 
dowment for concerts. The city purchased 
additional land adjacent to the library to 
enlarge its park area and offered the center 
of this park as a site for the Shrine. There- 
upon an architect was chosen in the person 
of the writer who was placed in full charge 
of design, construction and decoration. 


That which largely inspired the design of 
the building is a magnificent bust of Lincoln 
carved out of Carrara marble by the emi- 
nent sculptor, George Grey Barnard, 
whose fame is international and whose mas- 
terpieces are to be found in state capitols 
and national centers in many lands. It is 
not an ordinary portrait bust, but one which 
once seen is never forgotten. It seems to 
breathe forth the very soul of the Lincoln 
whom the world acknowledges as immortal. 
His strength, his patience, and his great 
compassion are all there expressed. To dis- 
play this bust to the best advantage was 
one of the main objectives in planning the 
building. 


The ceiling of the interior is domed 
and is enhanced with mural paintings sym- 
bolic of Lincoln's achievements. It might be 
supposed that harmonious color and geo- 
metrical ornament would have accomp- 
lished a sufficient decorative purpose, but 
the walls and. ceiling would then have 
added nothing distinctive of, or in praise 
of Lincoln. In this regard the following 
words of Edwin H. Blashfield, the eminent 
mural painter were convincing: ... "In the 
public building the community celebrates 
itself and is preached to; it wants meaning. 
and meaning of the highest. If the com- 
missioners of a State capitol came to a 
mural painter it would be preposterous for 
him to say to them: ‘Beauty is all that you 
require in your rooms . . . beauty of pattern 
and line, color and figures. They would 
reply: "We have suffered and fought in 
the cause of progress and civilization, re- 
mind us of it upon our walls. We have had 
heroes, celebrate them.’ ” 


With the force of these words in mind 
the question of what mural painter to select 
was quite a problem for a time, since mural 
painting and easel painting are two quite 
different things; and good mural painters 
are not numerous. Ín easel painting the 
artist strives to focus attention upon his 
framed picture. In mural painting he must 
subordinate his work to the best effect of 
the room as a whole. In this case he was 
required to subordinate his work to the 
bust of Lincoln. Also a mural painter 
should strive to decorate, not illustrate. 
What Lincoln did for instance can best be 
learned from books; the mural painter's 
function is to stimulate our emotions so that 
we have a greater desire to read the books. 
А task requiring so much skill and delicacy 
was not for every artist to attempt, and it 
was with great satisfaction therefore that 
the services of the internationally famous 
mural painter, Dean Cornwell, were finally 
secured for the purpose. 


It might be supposed that the various 
outstanding achievements for which Lin- 
coln stands could best be portrayed deco- 
ratively by realistic representations of 
Lincoln himself engaged in accomplishing 
these achievements. But if that were done 
it would occasion for one thing numerous 
painted portraits of Lincoln on the walls 
and ceiling which would compete with the 
portrait bust in marble. Mr. Cornwell made 
it clear that this would not do, that Lin- 
coln's achievements should be portrayed by 
allegorical symbolism such as has been used 
in the decoration of the Lincoln Memorial 
at Washington, D. C., and elsewhere. He 
conjectures that this is so, partially because 
Lincoln did not actually himself go about 
freeing the slaves, but it was the spiritual 
idea of freedom for the colored race, which 
he stood for so valiantly and succeeded in 
spreading over the land, which finally ac- 
complished the purpose. Likewise, it was 
Lincoln's superb qualities of character, his 
faith, wisdom, courage, etc., which finally 
resulted in the preservation of the Union. 
Hence it is these spiritual qualities which 
Mr. Cornwell has portrayed in an allegor- 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 13 » OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


ical manner and by the eight symbolic fig- 
ures on the ceiling. 

The painting in the lunette to the right 
of the niche is an allegory representing the 
emancipation of the slaves. The idea is 
typified in various ways; by the torch of 
truth which makes free, by the lyre of har- 


Mural by Dean Cornwell 


costumes suggest no one race of people, 
and the East, being the cradle of civiliza- 
tion, was representative. 


The painting in the lunette to the left of 
the niche is an allegory representing the 
preservation of the Union. It is typified by 
a central figure holding the two sections of 


LUNETTE, SYMBOLIC OF "THE EMANCIPATION OF THE SLAVES," 
THE LINCOLN SHRINE, REDLANDS, CALIFORNIA 


Elmer Grey, Architect 


mony, by the fruits of abundance and by 
the flowers of beauty which it is the priv- 
ilege of every man under freedom to enjoy. 
If the costumes seem to suggest a slight 
eastern influence it is because the artist felt 
that the emancipation of the slaves which 
Lincoln promulgated did not apply just to 
those in the southern states but will have 
its lasting effect upon all races for all time. 
He was intent therefore upon having the 


the country together, while near by are 
other figures representing the next most 
stable thing in life, the union of man and 
wife in the home. 

Only occasionally is a building designed 
having as contributory adjuncts very not- 
able examples of both sculpture and mural 
painting. The combination of architecture, 
sculpture and murals designed as a unit so 
far as their relationship is concerned, and 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E! 14 > OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


the rare historical documents which this 
building contains. makes it outstanding. 
Because of the value and coordination of 
its art treasures, and its Lincolniana, when 
future guide books of America are written 
special attention is sure to be called to the 
Lincoln Shrine of Redlands. 


mem by Dean Cornwell 


for it should be remembered that the Span- 
ish element of the population in Southern 
California constitutes but a very small per- 
centage of its entire inhabitants. Taking 
them as a whole the people are as cosmo- 
politan as those of any other section of our 
country. They have the same historical and 
architectural background, having come 


LUNETTE, SYMBOLIC OF "THE PRESERVATION OF THE UNION," 
THE LINCOLN SHRINE, REDLANDS, CALIFORNIA 


Elmer Grey, Architect 


The Charles J. Wild house is done in 
adaptation of the French manor style. The 
hope that was held by many architects 
some years ago that the Spanish or Italian 
styles and their adaptations would ulti- 
mately prevail in Southern California (ow- 
ing to the Spanish having been started well 
by the Mission fathers) has not been ful- 
filled. And quite naturally. The idea it 
seems was based on too narrow an outlook, 


from all parts of the United States and 
even from distant Europe. 

It is not to be expected therefore that 
the architecture of their homes will follow 
any rigid chalk-line of style laid down by 
the first settlers. There are too many other 
influences at work. Many Californians 
have for instance come from New England 
where they learned to love Colonial archi- 
tecture, especially its interiors with their 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ж 15 > OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


INTERIOR OF LINCOLN SHRINE, REDLANDS, CALIFORNIA 
ELMER GREY, ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 16 =- OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Mural by Dean Cornwell 


MURAL REPRESENTING ONE OF THE QUALITIES OF LINCOLN'S 
CHARACTER, LINCOLN SHRINE, REDLANDS, CALIFORNIA 


ELMER GREY, ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E Ta » OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


О s мыл е gm 


И EE Pi cte ааа 
Por IRR RESIDENCE OF CHARLES J. WILD, PASADENA, CALIFORNIA 
Elmer Grey, Architect 


Photo by Hiller 


RESIDENCE OF CHARLES J. WILD, PASADENA, CALIFORNIA 
Elmer Grey, Architect 


ri 
Р 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER “ 18 5» OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


STUDIO OF MRS. J. M. GOSS, PASADENA, CALIFORNIA 
Elmer Grey, Architect 


DRESSING 
ROOM 
ЗЕНА 


um | 
m ex.cony $ $ JORGAN M 
о 
$ 


LOFT 
TH 


о T UDIO: 


PLAN, STUDIO OF MRS. J. M. GOSS, PASADENA. CALIFORNIA 
Elmer Grey, Architect 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 19 » OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


STUDIO OF MRS. J. M. GOSS, PASADENA 
Elmer Grey, Architect 


mahogany furniture, etc. It is for this rea- 
son that the so-called “Early California” 
style has become popular—because it is a 
fusion of the Spanish type of Monterey 
with certain New England Colonial fea- 
tures. Thus it recalls the Spanish tradi- 
tion on the exterior but permits of the use 
of Colonial furniture on the interior. 

And because many people in California 
are cosmopolitan and have traveled widely 
it is quite natural that they should want to 
bring in other styles which they have seen 
and admired in Europe and elsewhere and 
have their motives adapted to the design of 
their homes here. In this way the French 


manor style has recently been used, has met 
with favor and has the advantage of being 
less hackneyed than much else that has 
been tried. 75 - 


Тһе studio for Mrs. Madeline Goss was 
erected solely as a place to give private 
musical and dramatic entertainments. Аз 
can be seen, the main room is patterned 
after some of the great halls of old English 
manor houses, with an open-timbered roof, 
a stage at one end, a stairway at one side 
leading up to an over-hanging balcony. 
There are dressing rooms for actors and a 
kitchen for the preparation of refreshments. 


The Vicissitudes of a Young Architect 


Ап intimate account of the early practice of Elmer Grey, 
written in his characteristic breezy style in four parts, 
with suitable sketches and photographs extending over 
a period of useful years. The first instalment will appear 
in the November issue of this magazine. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER | 20 » OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Portfolio of Buildings for Scripps College 


Claremont, California 


Gordon B. Kaufmann « » Sumner Hunt and S. R. Burns 


Architects 


Wurster Construction Company 
Builders 


DORMITORY BUILDINGS, SCRIPPS COLLEGE, 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 
GORDON B. KAUFMANN, ARCHITECT 


LOSLLIHOSV 'NNVINADIVM 'H NOQUOD 
VINHOHITVO .LNONWSNVIO HOHTIOO 5441426 "TIVH ӘМІМ/ОЧЯ 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ж 22 > OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


LOSLIHOWV 'NNVIASIIVM `Ч МОадоо 
ШМОЙЯЧУТО `ЧОЯЛПОО 65441425 "TIVH ONINMOU” "ЧаУ>ОЧУ 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 23 > OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


S.LOS.LIHOWV '5МПЯ A'S аму .LNNH чямипѕ 
ІМОМНЧУЛО ‘ADATIOD SddRIOS "TIVH OINSQVOV HOVE 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 24 » OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


S.LOS.LIHO8V ‘SNANG "t `$ аму .LNDH чами 
INONSUVTIO A941109 54414525 "TIVH DINAGVOV НОЛУЯ 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 25 » OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


S.LOH.LIHO8V ‘SNANG € `$ ANY LNNH YANNNS 
LNONSWVIO ‘#997100 5441825 "TIVH опмчамчом HOTVE ‘ACVOUV 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ET 26 i OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


S.LOSLLIHO?IV 'SNANU "Ы `$ ONV мии EHNIATIS 
LNOWSUNVIO 'яоялпоО 5441825 "TIVH OIINHQVOV HO'IVH 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 27 » OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Ium: 


AUDITORIUM, BALCH ACADEMIC HALL, SCRIPPS COLLEGE, 


CLAREMONT 
SUMNER HUNT AND S. R. BURNS, ARCHITECTS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER - 28 ь OCTOBER, МІМЕТЕЕМ THIRTY-TW 


А STUDY IN ROOFS, BALCH ACADEMIC HALL, 
SCRIPPS COLLEGE, CLAREMONT 
SUMNER HUNT AND S. R. BURNS, ARCHITECTS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 29 » OCTOBER. NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


INTERIOR OF LIBRARY, SCRIPPS COLLEGE, 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 
GORDON B. KAUFMANN, ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ай 30 | а OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Santa Barbara School Юг Boys 


Carpenteria, California 


Reginald D. Johnson 


Architect 


Wurster Construction Company 
Builders 


VIEW FROM CAMPUS, SANTA BARBARA SCHOOL FOR BOYS, 
CARPENTERIA 
REGINALD D. JOHNSON, ARCHITECT 


45» 


LOS.LIHOJV 'NOSNHOÍ а GIVNIDSY 


VINNOSIIVO VRIHILNSHdWVO 'SAOd ЧОЧ '1OOHOS УЧУЯЧУЯ V.LNVS 
MEE: 3AX3SEEUMgMMIMMMMM а ны ----- 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 32 | OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


LOSLIHO?V 'NOSNHOÍ ‘а ('IVNIOS 
VINSOJl'IVO VRhIJS.ILNHdWHVO SAOG YOA 'IOOHOS ҮЧҮЯЧҮЯ V.LNVS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 33 » OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


тоннах ‘NOSNHO! а алуоян 
VINSOHTIVO 'VIRIH.INHdUHVO 'SAOd AOA TOOHDS VilVHd VH. V.LNVS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 34 к OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


IO8.LIHOWV 'NOSNHOÍ ‘а атуміояч 
VINSOJTIVO 'VRIH.LNSdSHVO SAOGH 404 'IOOHOS УЧУЯЧУЯ V.LNVS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E I 35 » OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


ARCHITECTURE AND FINANCE — TAX 


THE SURPLUS 


Part 112 


2m "circulation," i.e., 


the credit system of the financial world in 
times of panic becomes weakened, the ex- 
tremities become cold. Why not provide 
hot water bottles in the form of restrictive 
legislation to the end that the extremities, 
cold feet, irrational, and panic conditions 
may be neutralized and "the excess corn 
on the shelf" utilized to re-create values. 
At present, we depend on stimulants often 
regulated for the purpose of producing of 
further profits to "the manufacturer of 
panics.” Why not use the ounce of pre- 
vention at the extremities? The "support" 
in time of strife which substantial interests 
inject into the financial system is always 
open to the suggestion that is "dope," i.e., 
investments made in the interest of pre- 
ferred money holding groups. What we 
need is leaders of high finance who have 
the courage, intelligence, and the wisdom 
necessary to convince the people that cor- 
rect ethical principles in finance are not in- 
compatible with the true interests of the 
modern state. 

The “rioting and looting” of speculators 
should be and will be averted in time as al- 
ready this habit is known to be destructive. 
There is no excuse for the wholesale con- 
fiscation of small holdings through the 
panic of banking institutions. The auto- 
matic brakes through legislation are bound 
to be provided. Ш informed state legisla- 
tion already as in the making, to say noth- 
ing of the caldron of seething purposes in 
Washington, D. C., purring softly, prep- 
aratory for a boil over. 


Part I was published in the September number. 


by 
WILLIAM LEE WOOLLETT 
Architect 


What would happen if all loaning agen- 
cies came under a common ban, to the ef- 
fect that loans foreclosed showing no equity 
must be carried at the expense of the entire 
loaning group? Would this provision tend 
to prevent careless loaning of money, and 
needless foreclosure? 

There are laws which protect the wage 
earner in a very wonderful way. His con- 
dition is infinitely better as regards his ге]а- 
tion with his employer than it was a 4ес- 
ade ago. The law takes the view that the 
wage earner is the ward of the state, and 
thus seeks to protect him from the unscrup- 
ulous employer. The poor are the little 
children of the rich. The inexperienced in 
financial matters, be they very rich or very 
poor, should be deemed to be wards of the 
state. They should be protected from the 
importunities of the unscrupulous. The 
state requires order and equity in the minor 
business transactions of the individuals 
composing the body politic. 

The ever recurring cycle wherein the 
rich and the poor alike become prey to the 
easy money mania until they are fed up, 
is amusing and necessary. But why not put 
a hot water bottle at the feet of the patient? 
He might come back a little stronger for 
the shearing, stay a little longer during the 
milking process, and enjoy the process to 
a degree himself. The body economic as 
a whole might thereby develop staying 
powers so that normality may become 
chronic. Prosperity is a condition of mutual 
helpfulness. Friendly barter is the key- 
stone of commerce. Society as a whole does 
not profit from the congested savings of the 
people. It certainly does not profit from 


4:» 


{Бе poverty of the consumer. We should 
tax the surplus! We must tax the gambler 
out of existence. 

But according to our theory previously 
expressed, the gambler should be encour- 
aged to express his individual urge to 
gamble. Indeed, this is true. He should be 
encouraged until he puts himself out of 
business. Is this happening? 

АП of the great vested interests believe 
in the prosperity о} all the people all of the 
time. But the “cannon fodder” of human- 
ity, rich and poor alike, "click" with the 
laws of economics a little better each time 
the bill is paid. More legislation for con- 
serving stability should be the paramount 
business of the moment. More examination 
of the fundamental laws of economics 
should become the business and amusement 
of all mankind. Our children should be 
taught the function of credit and the nature 
of wealth. 

I am amazed at the unscientific way in 
which public officials are going at this un- 
employment and financial problem. I say 
unscientific, because it is a well known fact 
that the disease of unemployment and finan- 
cial depression is occasioned by over-pro- 
duction. The effort should then be defi- 
nitely in line with the governing of produc- 
tion. I see no effort to definitely decrease 
production on a large scale. The oil inter- 
ests and a few other lines have done some- 
thing to be sure. But we want the entire 
problem under examination. Our public 
moneys are now so often easily spent and 
unwisely invested in surplus irrigation svs- 
tems, surplus roads, surplus wheat, surplus 
educational facilities, etc., that generations 
of posterity are impoverished. In the opin- 
ion of some economists, we are doomed to 
a period of wholesale repudiation. I hope 
that this is not so. 

At this time, the first thing we need is 
information and the willingness to look the 
information in the face. Lacking this atti- 
tude, we may expect nothing of lasting 
benefit from all our examination. 

When I see an inclination to pile up 
bonded indebtedness of the city, county, 
state, and government, in order to provide 
a temporary paliation of the evils from 
which we suffer, I get the idea that some- 
one is either not thinking or that someone 


is welching, probably a combination of 
both. A search for the stores of wealth 
which are bulwarked behind the encircling 
battlements of excess production, is now in 
order. To be quite specific, excess produc- 
tion is largely the result of speculative ef- 
fort. By what right does an individual cre- 
ate a commodity which may cause the 
downfall of every like commodity including 
his own? Take oil, for instance. 

Our financial system fosters the use of 
money and credit for advance production. 
This advance production opens an ungodly 
maw for the securities which are discounted 
for loan purposes and rediscounted to the 
nth power. This makes credit cheap or 
prices high, which ever way you want to 
say it. Without interest and interest Беаг- 
ing securities, advance production would 
have to be provided out of savings rather 
than on borrowed money. The scope and 
power of "interest" is increasing its permu- 
tations and combinations. In the hands of 
skillful manipulators credits create a semb- 
lance of power. It has proven a rope of 
sand. We need to chain the god, interest, 
to know its potentialities, to cultivate its 
pacific benefits. 

The willingness of capital to deprive it- 
self of the temporary benefits of the specu- 
lative angle in order to bolster economic 
balance, is the number one question, the one 
outstanding need of the commercial life of 
the day! The answer of this or any other 
like question must come out of the race-con- 
sciousness. Laws will do no good! look at 
prohibition! We want wisdom, a unit соп- 
sciousness, among our people. This can 
come only through the guiding of thought 
processes due to race intelligence. Our 
nation and the world must be set to think 
along correct lines in order that we may 
emerge, after decades perhaps, with this 
healing consciousness. 

The creation of new issues of obligations 
like street, city, and government bonds as 
a temporary remedy for unemployment, re- 
sults merely in the encircling of another 
realm of power and stored wealth. New 
and more flexible and less conservative 
types of mortgage and finance companies 
only serve to disintegrate the underlying 
foundation of credit. Conservative old line 
corporations and banks with less liberal 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E! 37 » OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


borrowing power envisage these new finan- 
cial organs as "bucket shops." The profes- 
sional financial gamblers will be the only 
ones ultimately to profit by a more liberal 
borrowing policy. 

But by using the money raised by tax on 
incomes on поп - productive permanent 
works of public benefit, will serve to get the 
stored wealth into general circulation and 
no kick back for future generations. 

Let us turn to history for an answer. 
How have past civilizations contrived to 
utilize the "surplus" which is inevitable in 
any regulated, governed, prosperous com- 
munity? I say inevitable, because the зрес- 
ulative, outreaching, growing, tendency of 
man is to create. It is the one outstanding 
fact of history that man moves with his 
flocks and herds to larger, greener, pas- 
tures. It is the opulence and power of man 
which makes war, it is the pressing of pro- 
duction in some field, i.e., population on 
some natural limitation, lack of water, lack 
of commercial contact, lack of consuming 
power. Always some lack asserts itself in 
a tendency to move in the direction of least 
resistance. 

Now! information, historical research, 
willingness to face facts, breaks down the 
barriers and enables man to see and know 
quickly the angle of least resistance. 

History first impresses us that the sur- 
plus of the past civilizations has gone into 
unproductive monuments. Egypt left her 
temples, the Pyramids and the vast Rock 
Cut Tombs. Greece left her temples, the- 
aters and sculptures, the Roman Empire 
its Thremae, Acquaducts, Temples, Pal- 
aces; and the Gothic age its cathedrals, etc. 
It is very simple in principle. If you spend 
a million dollars on a nice pile of dead 
stone and go away and leave it there, the 
money spent has gone into labor, food, 
clothes, life and living for certain individ- 
uals—an unending source of wealth; and 
the creative processes have been re-estab- 
lished. If, on the other hand, the cost of 
an enterprise is projected into the future in 
the form of dollars out at interest, which 
means taxes on the homes, incomes, etc., 
of the workers who produce the pile of 
stone, we have a debt situation which may 
be re-expressed something like this. I have 


eaten an apple (meaning the wage). No 
one gave me the apple; the apple was loaned 
to me. I cannot give the apple back, and 
I cannot give back the value of the apple: 
but [ will pay interest on the value of the 
apple for all time or until I can save enough 
to pay for the apple. Public enterprises 
should be paid for out of hand if up keep 
is necessary, the interest should be pro- 
vided out of taxed incomes or taxed sur- 
lus. 
К God gives тап the flocks, the brooks, 
the winded steppes. Man plucks from the 
stored riches of the world and lives. So 
the stored riches of mankind, the surplus, 
is another form of nature's stored riches. 
The "surplus" should be organized for the 
use of mankind, as it is by primitive peoples. 

Why not consider that the apple is 
gone? The apple to begin with was owned 
as "surplus" i.e., no one could eat it. Like 
the tree made by God, the surplus apple 
came from the lap of nature. 

The commercial life of man is a phase or 
“spasm” of nature, if you like, and all the 
surplus of this commercial life belongs to 
mother nature to whom we all belong, to 
whom we go, and from whence we came. 

But economics seem to abhor the vaccum 
of a gift. The very idea of giving or getting 
something for nothing seems to be ana- 
thema. Is it a gift if the accumulated wealth 
of a common-wealth like the United States 
is taxed, even to the point of extinction for 
the common weal? But we are, as said be- 
fore, dependent on this surplus as a back 
log for industry and commerce. How shall 
the two ideas meet? 

How shall we in fairness, knowing our 
dependence on the cumulative powers and 
intelligence co-ordinate with accumulated 
wealth draw off the wealth and intelligence 
which we need? For we need not only 
bread but also ideas. How shall we, all 
mankind, become the beneficiaries of a sys- 
tem of taxation which at present continu- 
ously and painfully liquidates our surplus 
in the interest of congested "surplus." How 
shall we do this without the charge that 
we are looking with greedy eyes upon the 
just earnings of others? 

There is a way to at least begin on the 
problem and in a manner to which no sane 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 38 ў> OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


man can object. We will tax first the evil 
which we can plainly see. Consider the sur- 
plus automobiles. Every man who uses an 
automobile is paying interest on the thou- 
sands of idle rotting automobiles all over 
the world, and the cost of owning his auto- 
mobile is increased because of the clumsy, 
dingy, financial methods which govern the 
production of automobiles. Every idle, un- 
sold automobile two years after it is made 
might become confiscate to the state and 
sold to the highest bidder. This provision 
would assure against a certain part of the 
waste in automobile production. It would 
probably put some firm out of business, but 
why not now if not sooner? There are many 
other ways of applying this principle, a 
generous tax on idle automobiles as al- 
ready mentioned would help. 

Too many automobiles, homes, and "corn 
on the shelf," compel idleness. Why have 
we automobiles, homes, and "corn on the 
shelf," which cannot be sold? Why this 
ever recurrent forced holding о} a vast un- 
employed surplus? We have a surplus be- 
cause of the uninformed grasping of a spec- 
ulatively inclined public. Why should these 
commodities be allowed to disintegrate and 
disappear while being held for future dis- 
tribution? What of the millions of tons of 
food which spoil in storage or in the fields 
unharvested? In the hands of the con- 
sumer, these same commodities, would con- 
tribute to the well being and general pros- 
perity of the community as a whole. How 
to get the "unemployed and disappearing 
surplus" into the hands of the consumer 
without violating the sacred laws of “ pros- 
perity rights" is the question. The answer 
may Бе — tax the idle and superfluous 
material, tax superfluous unemployed land, 
tax speculation, take “surplus” out of the 
competitive column where it hangs as dead 
weight and into the hands of the consumer. 
Economists will tell you it were better that 
this surplus be dumped in the sea, if not 
needed. But by means of the subterfuge of 
taxation, the dumping would be after some- 
one has had the chance to ask for it and 
pay for it. А black haired man will buy 
a red wig, if you will sell it cheap enough! 

No man should be without the means of 
transportation today any more than in for- 
mer years could he rightfully be prevented 


from using the "King's Highway." А way 
should be found by means of which a man's 
transportation should be “encouraged.” 
The nearest thing to the "King's High- 
way, in automobile ownership would be 
by means of a tax which would accelerate 
the sale, under certain conditions, of every 
automobile of a certain age not in the con- 
sumer's hands. You practically create a 
"King's Highway" on wheels when you set 
out to tax all idle automobiles. 

But it is patent that many commodities 
other than automobiles are thus held to 
deteriorae in storage. We have the aspect 
of bulging elevators, over-stocked dairies, 
and at the same time, hungry people. And 
we have not accepted the idea of the Dole 
as being the way out of our troubles. [t is 
work that we want for the people. But pub- 
lic works of any kind initiated for this pur- 
pose are not without their accompanying 
evils. More public buildings, etc., for in- 
stance, mean bond issues, increased taxes; 
and then additional taxes, for maintaining 
these improvements becomes part of the 
picture. We are already threatened with 
repudiation of certain obligations, so heav- 
ily have we in the past drawn upon the sav- 
ings of future generations. The improve- 
ments needed to keep people employed 
should be provided from funds derived 
from taxing large incomes, and should not 
be paid through taxing the very people 
for whose benefit the improvements are pro- 
jected. This sounds Bolshevistic. If you 
do tax the surplus for unproductive and 
self-sustaining public monuments, such as 
roads the result will be that the wage earner 
will implore you to tax his surplus. He will 
always be ready to trade a surplus for a 
job. 
To alleviate the suffering of the poor by 
means of work provided by a tax on their 
future, is to duplicate a system long worn 
out. On the other hand, if we create perm- 
anent concrete roads which require a mini- 
mum of upkeep, or some other form of pub- 
lice benefit, which does not imply upkeep 
charges, we come nearer to a solution of 
the unemployment problem. 

We are living in an age when man can 
produce of all kinds of things more than he 
can use. Wars and famines have been use- 
ful instruments for dispersal of the surplus 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER Е 39 p OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


savings of the human family. As soon as а 
man's belly is full, he wants to fight some- 
thing or gamble. Modern civilization heaps 
upon us earnings. but not always devises 
perfect methods of distribution, nor devises 
a stomach large enough to match our eyes. 
The corn stays on the shelf. Sometimes the 
owner of the shelf stops piling up more 
corn and production ceases. What would 
happen if the owner of the shelf were not 
allowed by law to pile up any more than 
he would guarantee to sell, or in other 
terms, what if surplus stock of goods would 
be required to represent earnings rather 
than a mere extension of credits and be 
taxed accordingly. 


Building permanent roads, roads not re- 
quiring upkeep, today would provide a 
means for dispensing the decaying surplus, 
the rotting "corn on the shelf." The inci- 
dental cumulative charges for upkeep and 


maintenance which accrue to the individ- 
uals who held ware-houses of automobiles 
and produce doomed to be lost through 
non-use, could be saved. These products 
taxed out of their seclusion would build 
many ‘pyramids’ and much good roads. 
Of course, it is not so simple as all that! 
In ancient Egypt, for example, there was 
so much corn and so many hungry people. 
The king did the rest—unhappily we have 
no king. А complex modern state requires 
an elaborate segregation of surplus— ‘corn 
on the shelf” and hence the proper dis- 
semination of this surplus to labor is a diffi- 
cult problem. 

The justification for the expendtiure of 
moneys on public monuments is the neces- 
sity for men to work for a living rather 
than be given a living. The needy should 
be provided for, undoubtedly, but reduce 
the number of needy by supplying work. 


[Concluded in November Number] 


RESIDENCE FOR MR. AND MRS. HARRY POLLOK, POINT LOMA 
Wayne D. McAllister, Designer 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ^ 40 Fr OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


SECURITY THROUGH PLANNING 


Sx Mateo County has 


embarked upon a planning program which 
intimately affects the welfare of all of its 
citizens. The County Planning Commission 
has been intrusted with the task of prepar- 
ing a Master Plan which shall include 
those subjects under governmental juris- 
diction which relate to the physical form 
and appearance of the county. This plan 
will include streets and highways, land 
use or zoning, parks and recreation, trans- 
portation and transit and other subjects re- 
lating to the physical development of the 
county. The county has no intention of 
furthering these plans to a point of real- 
ization; rather they are a means to an end, 
that of providing a pattern and guide for 
the future growth and development of the 
county. By the latter process the citizens 
of the county are having provided the defi- 
nite assurance that they will not later be 
taxed for reconstructing the community. 
Certain reconstructive processes are neces- 
sary, such as the widening and realignment 
of traffic thoroughfares through communi- 
ties already developed, but, in the main, 
the Master Plan will indicate the physical 
framework into and around which the 
future development of the county will grow 
and from which it will take its form. 

Each phase of the Master Plan has a 
distinct bearing upon the welfare of the 
county. The street and highway plan not 
only will prevent future expensive recon- 
structive activities but will offer a basis for 


by 
HUGH R. POMEROY 


the orderly and most beneficial develop- 
ment of the county. It will make possible 
the scientific expenditure of road funds, 
both for construction and maintenance. 

The zoning plan will protect the values 
and the use characteristics of property, pre- 
venting the intrusion of objectionable uses 
into residential neighborhoods and provid- 
ing for the orderly development of com- 
mercial and industrial districts. Control of 
roadside uses will assure beneficial land 
use development and will prevent the high- 
ways of the county from being made hid- 
eous by shacks and signs. 

The park and recreation plan will pro- 
vide Юг the development of the great rec- 
reation assets of the county, which are of 
significance not only to the inhabitants of 
the county but to those of the entire San 
Francisco bay region. In this class are the 
beaches, the mountains and the bay front. 
Standards will be established for the pro- 
vision of necessary recreation facilities for 
the various community neighborhoods of 
the county. 

Such plans as the foregoing and the 
others to be comprised within the subject 
of planning, will serve as the physical basis 
for a definite financial plan, whereby it will 
not be necessary to make at one time inor- 
dinately heavy expenditures for any one 
public purpose but through the years there 
will be applied a budget of capital expend- 
itures. It is possible to provide the physi- 
cal necessities of the community without 
undue burden simply through the efficient 
management of existing sources of revenue 


432» 


in the light of comprehensive physical plan- 
ning. 

The foregoing program is not one to be 
developed over night: it will be the product 
of gradual evolution over a period of years. 
The work thus far has consisted largely of 
securing the necessary basic data, covering 
land uses, traffic flow, the physical condi- 
tion of the road and highway system of 
the county and the physical conditions of 
the shore line of the county. 

These data are being assembled in order 
to give a competent background for the 
preparation of plans. There is no elab- 
orate program of work under way but, 
under a budget which is thoroughly rea- 
sonable as related to other county activi- 
ties, the work of the Commission is care- 
fully laid out according to a program which 


Street in д, teep Hillside Subdivision 
20 Minimum Жоадбед 


was prepared at the inauguration of its 
work in September, 1931. By adherence to 
this program lost motion is obviated and all 
activities of the Commission tend toward 
a definite objective. 

The work has been carried on carefully 
within the scope of county policy as deter- 
mined by the Board of Supervisors and has 
received general support by the cities, the 
civic organizations and the people gener- 
ally of the county. 

By the work of the County Planning 
Commission the development of the county 
is given definiteness and there is the assur- 
ance that disorder and wastefulness will be 
prevented. The expenditures for planning 
are but an infinitesimal part of the great 
savings which will result. 


4 Area 


Community Parkin 2g Area. 
for d. beep Hillside Subdivision 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER (i 42 № OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


COUNTY PLANNING IN CALIFORNIA 


OT following report 


and forecast, together with the illustra- 
tions, are reprinted by courtesy of the 
author, Roy N. Bishop, chairman of the 
San Mateo County Planning Commission, 
and Hugh R. Pomeroy, advisor to the сот- 
mission: 

The San Mateo County Planning Сот- 
mission was established under the provi- 
sions of the California Planning Act by 
County Ordinance, adopted June 15, 1931, 
and completed its organization as a part 
of the county government during the еп- 
suing six weeks. 

Six members of the commission serve 
without compensation and three county 
officials are, according to law, members of 
the commission and serve without addi- 
tional compensation. 

The commission was established as the 
active means of assurance that the county 
should grow according to a plan and that 
its development should be socially and 
economically sound. Therefore, realizing 
that "good planning should be well plan- 
ned" the commission prefaced its work 
with a survey of the field of planning and 
an examination of the physical and devel- 
opmental features of the county and upon 
that basis outlined a definite program of 
work. This program sets forth the elements 
of a Master Plan adequate to serve as a 
pattern for the growth of San Mateo 
County and outlines the principal features 
of planning administration to accomplish 
this purpose. 

Pursuant to this program the commission 


SAN MATEO 
Has Ambitious Program 


first formulated the procedure and гедша- 
tions for subdivision control, submitting 
these to conferences with representatives ot 
the municipalities and of the realty boards 
of the county, then recommending them to 
the Board of Supervisors for adoption. 
Several subdivision maps have been consid- 
ered under these regulations, which already 
are proving their social and economic value 
to the county. 

In the assembling of data looking toward 
the preparation of a County Highway Plan, 
the commission has under way a thorough 
survey of the county roads and highways, 
covering the nature of their rights-of-way, 
their physical condition and the nature and 
extent of marginal uses, with seasonal traf- 
fic counts to be made. 

By the time these data have been gath- 
ered. the commission will largely have com- 
pleted a survey of the major land uses of 
the county, which is now being made. This 
will be a functional analysis of the county, 
serving as a background for all of the ele- 
ments of the county plan, and is of immed- 
iate necessity in the development of the 
highway plan and for county zoning. 

As an individual project, forming the 
first unit in the Highway Plan, the commis- 
sion has undertaken consideration of the 
Bayshore Highway. This artery is a high 
speed thoroughfare of high traffic effi- 
ciency, largely because of the almost com- 
plete absence of attrition of its through 
traffic capacity by marginal uses and be- 
cause of the limited number of intersecting 
thoroughfares. The former condition will 
in part, be preserved by reason of the 125- 
foot right-of-way, but expansion of the 


«45» 


3-1 ЗШЕ 
AUP gr SORA 
Local Traffic Е Srun& Highway Traffic , Locat Traffic 

А As Applied to Bayshore Highway 165 wide 


изу ‘в’ 57 


уа Highway 
rro Wide 


о 
8o Wide 


чыг, 


18 ee oF ES 
аа усыз эү ауас 
"ае 


60'“Wide 


Highway Cross Sections 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 44 > OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


“1257 -| 


i 


urban areas from El Camino Real to the 
Bayshore Highway and the industrializa- 
tion of the properties on the bay side of 
the highway will serve gradually to reduce 
it to the category of simply a wide city 
street. А study of this problem convinced 
the commission of the necessity of preserv- 
ing a through traffic character for Bay- 


c TN 
> "ААА 
umm 


cedure San Mateo county becomes the first 
county of the State to adopt a section of 
the master plan of highways and at the 
same time to establish under the police 
power official street lines based thereon. 
The North Palo Alto district has peti- 
tioned the Board of Supervisors to provide 
zoning protection for that territory. Pur- 


A E A RAIS Ае ААА 
i RE E Pid 


e ES Jm s S Cross Section 
toPreserve Existin 9 Trees Alon GN arrow Road 


YS RUST RES T - 
—| Variable Width ess 28° 


Secondary Highvay divided for Hillside © Development 


Variations of Ф”аподго Croas Sections 


shore Highway and led to the adoption, 
with the approval of the State Division of 
Highways, of a cross-section providing for 
the segregation of through and local traf- 
fic on separate roadways. To this end, the 
dedication of an additional 30-foot width 
on each side is being required in all new 
subdivisions and the commission is now en- 
gaged in proceedings for the establishment 
of building lines protecting a similar width 
along frontage already subdivided and 
frontage not yet subdivided. By this pro- 


suant to this petition the board instructed 
the Planning Commission to proceed with 
the preparation of a county zoning plan. 
This will first be applied in the district lying 
between the cities of Belmont, San Carlos, 
Redwood City, Atherton and Menlo Park 
on one side, San Francisco Bay on another 
and the Santa Clara County boundary on 
the other. It is anticipated that county 
zoning will ultimately provide: 

A—The protection of detailed urban 
zoning regulations for the unincorporated 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER “j 45 к OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Traffic $ ћгееѓ 


iC.) Сони, --- 


Section of Radburn New Jersey ro Showing Lots abutting upon 
rights of шау each serving only asa means of access to the lots 
abuiting thereon. Traffic passes by rather than among the houses 


у = 


be г 


= E As о, АЁ : 

aS. КЕС. 2. oe AU E: у M he 
= po EL л ах ^ 

E : $ 


PE - < 
Ех... 
ES 


E. Sy Мр E: = 


Houses Face font Yards and Gedestrian | Cul-e-Kàc Service Roadways Give hecess to the 
Valks Rather Than Streets Carrying Traffie Rears of Houses 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER EI 46 > OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Ari NP E E. 
M 4 
yt aperta R 


№ 


oe 
N eS 


IR 
PED 


AW |р; ] 
үш 


Д Ni Ni 
4l EA 14 


did 


Ч 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


Sreperty Іле 


' Road and canyon 6ollom dedicated | 
| in entirety Zo Public Use | 


Alternative |! 3 | | 
од dedicated Canyon bottom reserved for use о 
methods of ag i о | 


ее | Zo а adjacent owners or covered by re 


; | 

|. Road and part of canyon бойот | Opposite bank. included | 
І э Pu 2 Usg m anie бойу under | 
| 


ш protective restrictions 


C алуоп Bottom às Fart of fr arkady Freatment 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 47 > OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Clever Leaf Tyne of Grade Separation Providing 
Complete T Ре Уу. Traffic хә (ALIA. St uggested 
JSubdivision Design bo Adjust Layout to Separation 


towns of the county and for the unincor- 
porated interstices in the metropolitan 
mosaic; 

B—Protection for the distinctly scenic 
areas of the county; and 

C—Marginal protection along the high- 
ways in the county. 

Аза step toward one о! the elements of 
a recreation plan, the commission is now 
making a detailed survey of the county's 
ocean beaches. This study is looking to- 
ward the ultimate objective of: 

А— Beach acquisition, as may be found 
advisable: 

B— Provision of access to the beaches; 
and 

C— Provision of picnic and auto parking 
space adjacent to them. 

These are two phases of county planning 
which affect but few counties of the State. 
Particularly because of the prospective in- 
dustrial development of the shore of San 
Francisco Bay and because of the suburban 
character of portions of the county in rela- 


tion to San Francisco, these two phases of 
planning will ultimately be integral ele- 
ments of a county plan for San Mateo 
county. 

Altogether, county planning in San 
Mateo county is moving forward accord- 
ing to a carefully defined program, upon 
the basis of thorough fact finding and func- 
tional analyses and in the light of broad 
principles of community design. It is keep- 
ing close to the people of the county with 
frequent conference and public discussion 
of its aims and operations. By all of this 
it is engaged in making and administering 
a county plan which shall be more than a 
mere hope, serving as a fundamental pat- 
tern by which the development of the 
county from now on will take its form. San 
Mateo county is concerned with county 
planning only as it shall derive its form and 
character from the actual life of the county 
and is concerned with county plans only 
as they shall be inserted into the develop- 
ment and government of the county. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 48 e OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


HAPHAZARD GROWTH TENDS ТО CHOKE ITSELF, UNTIL CONGESTION AND 
INCONVENIENCE FORCE RECONSTRUCTION 


ence 


Ж”. oem ee 2 rr S ODER 
a К = E 22 522 р e ә каш, 


APPLYING THE COUNTY HIGHWAY PLAN AS A GUIDE TO DEVELOPMENT 
THROUGH SUPERVISION OF SUBDIVISION PLANS AND BY THE ESTABLISH- 
MENT OF BUILDING LINES IS INSURANCE AGAINST THE HEAVY COST OF 
RECONSTRUCTING OUR COMMUNITIES 


кы. 
Р РД, 


BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT LINING A MAIN TRAFFIC THOROUGHFARE 
PLUNGES LOCAL TRAFFIC INTO THE THROUGH TRAFFIC STREAM, DESTROYS 
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE HIGHWAY AND BLIGHTS ITSELF IN THE 
RESULTING CONFUSION 


SEGREGATED ROADWAYS AND A PLAZA TYPE OF BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT 
PROVIDE ADEQUATE SPACE FOR “SHOPPING” TRAFFIC, PROTECTED LANES 
Ны» MOVEMENTS AND EFFICIENT ROADWAYS FOR THROUGH 


IP we зева 4 
|! LAUN DRY " 


Pu 
n c 
m 


“= 


ee AN 


THIS ONE COST NO MORE, IN THE AGGREGATE, TO BUILD—BUT IT WAS 
DESIGNED 


THE FIRST APARTMENT HOUSE IN А NEIGHBORHOOD TO OCCUPY MOST OF 
ITS LOT DOES NOT SUFFER SO LONG AS THE NEIGHBORS FURNISH THE 
LIGHT, AIR, OPEN SPACE AND PLEASANT SURROUNDINGS 


2 
т 
теди — 

MEE 


AN APARTMENT HOUSE COVERING MORE THAN FROM FIFTY TO SIXTY 

PER CENT OF THE AREA OF ITS LOT IS A PARASITE ON THE OPEN SPACE 

Sc DE DU AND LEADS TO THE ULTIMATE BLIGHTING OF 
I I 


DOES THE CABIN-SITE BUYER SEEK А REPETITION OF CITY CROWDING IN 
ТНЕ MOUNTAINS? 


Tie ae 
1 Zu 


(7% 
washing 


оз 
К И E 727 
ІШІНЕ тәй 52 
è j Tte vi Е 


T 7 Т Ak 


OR DOES HE SEEK THE SECLUSION AND SPACIOUSNESS OF THE 
OUT-DOORS? 


PERMANENCE IN ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN 


ЕЕ the fourteenth 


edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica 
comes this definition of architecture: "The 
art of so building as to apply both beauty 
and utility. The end of architecture is to 
arrange the plan, masses and enrichments 
of a structure in such a way as to impart 
to it interest, beauty. grandeur, unity and 
power without sacrificing convenience." 

May we not add that the end of archi- 
tecture is also to impart a permanent qual- 
ity to the structure, a quality which is fun- 
damental to all good architecture of the 
past. Is it not fundamental to all archi- 
tecture of all time? For the carrying out of 
a design, of whatever merit, in more or less 
perishable materials seems to be in the 
nature of stage craft rather than the prac- 
tice of sound architecture. Yet excellent 
design is carried out today in forms which 
are not permanent, which have but com- 
paratively few years in which to pertorm 
their functions and to minister to the long- 
ing for beauty by mankind. 

The houses that we build today of stucco 
on wooden frames all testify to our prefer- 
ence for the character of permanent con- 
struction in the forming of deep cut open- 
ings and other masonry details which pro- 
claim a falsehood, but appeal to the senti- 
mentality which is a part of our human 
nature, and although we do not like to be 
sentimental in practical affairs we uncon- 
sciously respond to the lure of things that 
endure. 

Is it not better to build our houses of 
truly imperishable stuff, masonry, brick, 
adobe or concrete, that cannot be swept 
away by fire or gale, but will resist the 
wear and tear of time, be cooler during 
summer heat, and more economically heated 
in winter, will prevent fire and oppose de- 


by 
THADDEUS JOY 


cay; that can be passed on to unborn gen- 
erations? 

A well designed house becomes out of 
date only in its equipment, and equipment 
such as automatic refrigerators, other me- 
chanical devices and heating appliances 
being manufactured in independent units. 
can be replaced as they are outgrown in 
our rapid material progress, so that a house 
built to outlast the centuries need not be- 
come outworn. 


Who is so calloused to the touch of sen- 
timent as not to feel the appeal of knowing, 
as he passes his portal, that it will stand to 
greet posterity for a century or more? 

[ stood one day on a lovely terrace over- 
hung with ancient grape vines, overlooking 
the vale of Carrara, the inexhaustible quar- 
ries. wooded mountains and the sea. The 
walls of the villa were beautiful in tones 
that time had bestowed upon them and the 
air was sweet with the fragrance of an old 
garden. It was not one of the famous villas. 
It was not well planned, but the lure of its 
mellowed age reflected on wall and pave- 
ment, was irrestible. [ spoke of charm and 
ancient loveliness to my friend who occu- 
pied the place. “Тһе house is not old,” said 
he. "It was built about a hundred years 
ago." 

Is the appeal of sentiment always to be 
repelled? Have we not a right to be proud 
that we build for future generations? 

In the designing of years to come, our 
edifices will take new forms as we develop 
a new style or break, in rebellion, with all 
tradition, but the houses of a day that is 
gone, if substantially built, will stretch forth 
the hand of memory in wethered walls and 
lovely casements to welcome the seeker for 
contentment and peace and he will respond 
to the sweetness and charm that only age 
can give. 


4 5: > 


ENGINEERING and CONSTRUCTION 


CONCRETE FOR HOOVER DAM 
Part Ill — LINING of DIVISION TUNNELS 


| HE type of convey- 


ance now used for transporting concrete 
from mixing plant to pouring site depends 
upon the means adopted for placing the 
concrete in its final location. Trucks loaded 
with two 2-yard bottom-dump steel buckets 
are employed when the concrete is con- 
veyed from trucks to pouring site by gantry 
crane, and the agitator drum, mounted on 
truck, is used when it is possible to pour 
concrete directly into place or into a chute 
leading to a hopper, where it is transferred 
to the steel buckets. 

The inlets of all diversion tunnels have 
been excavated to the portals and a con- 
crete arch cofferdam built around each 
portal for protection from floods. А rock 
fill nearly to the top of the cofferdam has 
been made between these structures and the 
river, and as a result trucks can not be 
driven directly into the tunnels at these 
portals. 

The present procedure for pouring the 
3-foot lining in the diversion tunnels is to 
transport the concrete from the mixing 
plant to the inlet portals in 4-cubic-yard 
agitator drums. llpon arrival at the tun- 
nel portal the concrete is dumped into a 
chute leading to a steel hopper, from which 
it is dumped into the steel buckets as de- 
sired. These buckets, two of which are 
loaded on each 10-ton truck, are then con- 
veyed to the pouring site, where a 10-ton 
gantry crane lifts the buckets from the 


by 
W. R. NELSON, Assistant Engineer 


truck and moves them to the pouring posi- 
tion. 

Lining diversion tunnels is performed in 
three operations—the invert section, com- 
prising the lower 74^ of the tunnel, is 
poured first; this is followed by pouring 
side walls, 88° on each side; followed in 
turn by pouring the remaining 110^ in the 
roof or crown of the tunnel. АП sections 
are poured for the same linear distance, so 
that a transverse construction joint is se- 
cured around the entire periphery of the 
tunnel. At present this section is 40 feet in 
length for all tunnels except in the portions 
of the two outer tunnels, which will later 
be used for spilway purposes, where the 
construction joints are placed 26-2, 3 feet 
apart. 

Preliminary Operations 

Following the excavation of a tunnel to 
its full 56-foot average diameter, the first 
operation preliminary to lining is the pour- 
ing of a concrete gantry rail base on both 
sides of the tunnel. The top of the founda- 
tion is 2.1 feet in height above the finished 
tunnel invert, and its inside corner is ac- 
curately poured to line and grade at a dis- 
tance of 15 feet 9% inches from the center 
line of the tunnel, with the result that the 
corner is located 24 inches from the fin- 
ished face of the concrete lining, the 24 
inches being the specified minimum thick- 
ness of lining. On each of these bases, 
which have an average width of 214 feet, 
is placed a 6 by 12 inch timber, to which 
is spiked a 90-pound rail. On these paral- 
lel rails is then mounted the 10-юп gantry 


45» 


crane, which is capable of traveling along 
the tunnel at the rate of 300 feet per min- 
ute. The transverse traveler of the crane, 
equipped with two hooks of 5 tons' capac- 
ity each and operated by a 10-horse-power 
electric motor, has a traveling speed of 125 
feet per minute and a hoisting speed of 100 
feet per minute. 

Longitudinal steel side forms 2 feet high, 
made up in sections 10 feet long. are set 
in position on the concrete foundation and 
held rigidly in place by bolting the form 
to the gantry rail concrete foundation and 
to the timber rail base. Transverse steel 
forms 2 feet wide, approximately 32 feet 
long, and spaced 26-2 3 or 40 feet apart, 
are bolted to the longitudinal forms and 
braced against the rock floor of the tunnel. 
The space between the form and the floor 
is filled with a 2-inch timber bulkhead. Both 
transverse and longitudinal forms are con- 
structed of 10-gage steel plate, smooth in- 
side, supported by 2-inch angle top flanges 
and 2 by 3 inch stiffeners, Keyways be- 
tween abutting sections of concrete, 175 
by 10 inches in transverse forms and 6 by 
12 inches in longitudinal forms, are pro- 
vided by grooves of these shapes in the 
steel plates. 


Lining the Invert 


The shape of the invert is procured by 
a device consisting primarily of two steel 
screeds supported on car wheels which run 
on the inside bottom flanges of two I beams. 
The beams, shaped to the invert and sep- 
arated by an approximate distance of 11 
feet, are connected at each end by a steel 
framework and supported by pairs of car 
wheels which run upon the upper flanges 
of the longitudinal forms. 

Each of the screeds has a horizontal 
upper deck mounted on the screed plate, 
which itself is shaped to the radius of curv- 
ature of the finished tunnel section, which 
is 50 feet in diameter. The screed plate is 
approximately 11 feet long and 4 feet wide. 
On the upper deck is mounted a hand 
winch operating two cables, each of which 
is fastened through single sheaves to the 
framework connecting the [ beams, so that 
by winding the winch the screed is moved 
upward across the invert toward the side 
forms. 


For concreting operations the winch on 
the screed is unwound, allowing the two 
screeds to meet at the center of the tunnel. 
The gantry crane picks up the two buckets 
of concrete from the truck and transports 
them to the pouring site. Concrete pour- 
ing through the bucket gate, which is 
opened or closed manually by a large re- 
movable handwheel, is dumped on the tun- 
nel wall side of each screed and puddled 
into place beneath. When the space is 
filled the screeds are pulled toward the tun- 
nel walls, leaving behind them the molded 
shape of the invert. This process is re- 
peated until the screeds arrive at the side 
forms. 

To move the screeds and their track 
framework lengthwise of the tunnel, screw 
jacks installed on the axles of the wheels, 
which run on the side form, raise the frame- 
work slightly, allowing it to be pushed 
manually to its next position, or, if the dis- 
tance to be moved is of great length, the 
gantry crane picks up the framework bod- 
ily and moves it to the desired location. 

The surface of the invert is finished by 
men working from a movable timber plat- 
form supported just above the concrete by 
curved I beams placed 5 feet apart. The I 
beams are connected at each end by a steel 
framework which contains double flanged 
wheels running on the gantry-crane track. 

After the concrete in the invert has been 
finished, sand is dumped on it for a depth 
of approximately 3 feet on the center line 
of the tunnel, to act as a roadway for oper- 
ation of trucks. 


Side- Wall Sections 


In preparation for pouring the side wall 
and crown sections, a concrete shelf 115 
feet wide is poured along each side of the 
finished invert as a foundation for 90- 
pound rails which are placed 1174 feet from 
the center line of the tunnel. These rails 
are the track for the side-wall jumbo, an 
80-foot long and 50-foot high structural 
steel framework weighing 385 tons. which 
supports the 14-inch steel skin plate for 
forming the walls. 

This jumbo is equipped with chutes, a 
traveling crane, and other mechanism for 
placing the concrete in designated position, 
and a series of screw jacks and ratchets 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER «| 56 > OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


used for distribution of hydro-static pres- 
sure of green concrete and for the adjust- 
ment of position of the wall forms for pour- 
ing, or for moving the jumbo to a new posi- 
tion. Because of unequal lengths of walls 
on curves the jumbo is made up in five pan- 
els, three of 20 feet and two of 10 feet 
length. Each of these sections is equipped 
as a unit with supporting double-flanged 
wheels, rectangular chutes, and “coffin” 
chutes. Screw jacks and steamboat ratch- 
ets are mounted at the top of the section 
and bear against the rock crown to resist 
the upward pressure of green concrete. 
Other jacks are installed in the ends of the 
horizontal struts connecting the forms on 
each side of the tunnel and bear against 
the arch beams holding the steel form face. 
On curves, wooden gores are built between 
the steel sections. 

А 5-ton bridge crane, equipped with two 
steel hooks and powered by a 10-horse 
power motor, runs on a pair of 50-pound 
steel rails carried on a longitudinal 10-inch 
H beam, which is in turn supported by the 
vertical struts on each panel. The bridge 
has a traveling speed of 300 feet per min- 
ute and the transverse traveler a hoisting 
speed of 100 feet and a traveling speed 
of 125 feet per minute. 

The concrete chutes from the interior 
face of the jumbo to the faces of the forms 
are spaced from 4 to 6 feet vertically at 
the form face and are from 8 to 16 feet in 
length. Six of the chutes are of ordinary 
type, 12 inches deep and 30 inches aver- 
age width, made of Zj-inch plate and 
2-inch angles. The opening in the form 
face at the lower end of the chutes is closed 
when desired by a 12 by 24 inch steel door 
pushed into position, flush with the form 
face and bolted in place. The uppermost 
chute, termed the “coffin”, is, in effect, a 
hopper 3 feet 3 inches deep at the end next 
the tunnel center lines, 12 inches deep at 
the form face, and 4 feet wide. This chute 
is hinged at the form face, and concrete is 
dumped over the top of the form by raising 
the loading end by means of a cable con- 
nected through sheaves to a compressed-air 
winch located at the base of the jumbo. 
This “coffin” is made and operated in the 
manner designated to permit pouring the 


top 4 feet of wall, which otherwise could 
not be poured by gravity on account of its 
proximity to the roof of the tunnel. 


Pouring the Concrete 

Pouring operations consist of lifting the 
2-cubic-yard bucket from the truck which 
has been driven to the section of the form 
designated for pouring, hoisting the bucket 
to the chute where the concrete is required, 
moving the bucket so that the hooks on the 
bucket gate are above a 3-inch round trip- 
ping iron bar over the chute; then by low- 
ering the bucket slightly the tripping bar 
opens the bucket gate, pouring the concrete 
into the chute. When emptied the bucket 
is disengaged from the bar, lowered to the 
truck, and the other bucket is lifted, moved 
to the opposite side of the tunnel, and 
poured in a similar manner. Ап inspector 
and five to seven laborers are behind each 
form to puddle the concrete into place. А 
timber bulkhead, framed to provide a 1% 
by 10 inch keyway similar to that in the 
invert concrete, is placed at the center of 
one-third point of the 80-foot length of 
forms, and each of these 40 or 26-2/3 foot 
sections is poured to the top of the form 
before the adjacent section is started. As 
the top part of the section is completed, 
carpenters remove the lower part of the 
bulkhead, continuing this removal as con- 
crete rises in the section. Obviously, con- 
creting is started at the lower level of 
chutes, and the doors at the ends of these 
are closed before pouring is started through 
the chutes above. А longitudinal keyway, 
approximately 2 by 10 inches, is formed or 
cut in the top of the side-wall concrete, 
against which the crown concrete will abut. 

At present 34 hours are required for 
pouring an 80-foot section of wall on each 
side of the tunnel. After the 80-foot sec- 
tion has been poured the forms are re- 
quired to remain in place for 12 hours. 
When this period has elapsed the timber 
bulkhead, erected at that end of the form 
which does not abut on the previously 
poured wall sections, is removed, the jacks 
and ratchets are loosened, and the form 
moved to a new position. Moving the jumbo 
is accomplished by means of a block and 
tackle attached to the rails ahead and rig- 
ged to air winches installed on the jumbo 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 57 » OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


at its Базе. Each 80-foot section of side 
wall requires approximately 60 hours per 
cycle. 

Crown Section 


A structural steel jumbo is used for pour- 
ing concrete in the crown section of the 
diversion tunnels. Essential parts of this 
jumbo are a concrete gun carriage, pipe 
carriage, traveler, and arch-form support. 
All these parts are supported on flanged 
wheels traveling on the 90-pound steel rails 
laid for the side-wall jumbo. 

The gun carriage, approximately 45 feet 
long and 47 feet high. is equipped with a 
2-drum electric hoist and two pneumatic 
concrete guns, with their receiving hoppers 
and concrete conveyers of 8-inch wrought 
iron and rubber hose. А 25-horsepower 
motor is used to move the carriage on its 
track. Its maximum speed is 100 feet per 
minute in a forward direction, or 20 feet 
per minute in reverse. The hoist for raising 
the buckets of concrete is powered by a 50- 
horsepower motor and has a lifting speed 
of 300 feet per minute. 

The pipe carriage and traveler serve to 
support the 8-inch pipe through which the 
concrete is forced into the space above the 
crown forms. The pipe carriage in pouring 
position is connected to the gun jumbo, 
while the traveler may be moved to a posi- 
tion between the pipe carriage and the 
arch-form jumbo to support the convevor 
pipe. 

The arch form jumbo is made up in 10- 
foot and 20-foot panels, each panel of 
which is built of structural steel and equip- 
ped with jacks to place the face of the form 
in correct position for pouring, or to lower 
the form face away from the finished con- 
crete. Trusses at 7-foot 4-inch maximum 
intervals, having lower chords 33 feet 4 
inches long, support the center 88^ of the 
crown section. Тһе М inch form face and 
its supporting beams for the lower 11? on 
each side of the center is connected at one 
end to the truss and supported at its oppo- 
site and exterior end by screw jacks bear- 
ing on the framework of the jumbo. Bulk- 
heads are placed to secure transverse con- 
struction joints at 40 feet or 26-2 3 feet, 


in manner similar to those for the invert 
and side-wall sections. 

For pouring, the electric hoist installed 
on the gun carriage lifts the 2-yard buck- 
ets from the track and dumps them into the 
gun hopper. The gun, by air pressure, 
forces the concrete through the 8-inch pipe 
to the center of the arch form. From here 
it flows to its final position through a 90* 
elbow and contination of the conveyor 
pipe, or by a chute and baffle arrangement 
running down the arch form. Pouring is 
started at the end of the form farthest re- 
moved from the gun, and the conveyor pipe 
and its appurtenant placing device are 
pulled lengthwise on the forms as concret- 
ing progresses. 

All concrete in the tunnels is sprinkled 
as soon as the forms are removed and is 
kept continuously wet for 14 days there- 
after. Pipes with jet sprays are installed 
along the walls and a film of water is per- 
mitted to run uninterrupted over the con- 
crete surface. This water is pumped from 
sumps dug near the ends of the tunnel port- 
als, the water being comparatively clear, 
as the silt is removed by the filtering action 
of the loose excavated material. 

The lining of diversion tunnels consti- 
tutes a prominent part of the concrete- 
pouring program for Hoover Dam and 
serves to give an impression of the magni- 
tude of the work and the efficient methods 
the contractor is using to gain the desired 
results. Lining the inclined spillway tun- 
nels, the spillway open cuts, the pressure 
tunnels, penstocks, and pouring concrete 
for the intake towers and the main struc- 
ture, a 727-foot dam and its attendant 
power plant will present special problems, 
each of which will be solved in different 
manner. 


The program of pouring concrete for 
Hoover Dam has started. When it is com- 
pleted a concrete structure will be flung 
across the channel of the Colorado River, 
and the undertaking, described by Presi- 
dent Hoover— Неге man builds his vision 
into stone, that generations to come may be 
blessed" '——will have been achieved. 


(Inscription. by President. Hoover on the Washington Memoria! 


Monument, erected on a pinnacle overlooking Hoover Dam site. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 58 > OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


AIR-CONDITIONING RIGHT UP TO THE MINUTE 


A ir conditioning is the 


art of maintaining desired atmospheric con- 
ditions in an enclosure. In present practice, 
temperature, humidity, air movement, and 
air purity with regard to dusts, bacteria. 
and odors are the individual items con- 
trolled. This treatment is concerned with 
the apparatus to perform these functions, 
as incorporated in gas heating appliances 
as necessary accessories. Temperature and 
humidity control are the primary fields of 
interest. 

As the climatic conditions experienced in 
summer and winter are diametrically op- 
posed, it is evident that the air condition- 
ing problems created by these two seasons 
must basically differ. This being the case, 
the general subject of air conditioning logi- 
cally divides itself into two subdivisions, 
namely, winter air conditioning and sum- 
mer air conditioning. These may be fur- 
ther subdivided as to the purpose for which 
the air is conditioned, but the present treat- 
ment will be confined principally to air con- 
ditioning for human health and comfort. 

Heat is generated in the body by the 
combustion of food. The amount of heat 
so generated by blood metabolism depends 
somewhat upon the dictates of comfort, but 
principally upon the degree of physical 


by 


H. L. WARREN, Heating Engineer 


activity. Аз man is a constant body tem- 
perature mammal, this heat must be dissi- 
pated by radiation, convection, and evapo- 
ration of perspiration, at the same rate that 
it is being generated. Within rather nar- 
row limits the body may prevent excessive 
heat loss by the constriction of peripheral 
circulation, thus creating an increased 
thickness of insulation in the form of body 
tissue. However, in order to create a com- 
fortable condition in winter, the tempera- 
ture of the air surrounding the body must 
be raised to a point that little or no action 
of the heat regulating organism of the body 
is required. 

As air is heated, its ability to hold mois- 
ture increases with the result that its rela- 
tive humidity decreases. Fig. 1 shows the 
quantity of water vapor in one pound of 
dry air at various temperatures, when it 
is saturated with moisture. The curve 
shows that one pound of air at 0 deg. Е. 
will hold only 5.47 gr. of moisture, while 
at 70 deg. F., one pound of dry air will 
hold 110.5 gr. of moisture. Since the abil- 
ity of air to hold moisture increases with 
its temperature, it is evident that when air 
with a given moisture content is heated, it 
becomes more dry, or thirsty for moisture. 
Let us assume that the outside temperature 
is 0 deg. Е. and the relative humidity is 
60 per cent. Referring to Curve А. Fig. 2, 


< > > 


we see that as this air is heated, its relative 
humidity progressively decreases and at the 
ordinary room temperature 


of 70 deg. Е., 


& 


$ 


GRAINS OF MOISTURE PER POUND OF ORY AIR 
RELATIVE HUMIDITY IN PER CENT 


а s 


5.47 GR. | | NU Б 
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 G 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
TEMPERATURE IN DEG.F. TEMPERATURE IN DEG. F. 
GRAINS OF MOISTURE PER POUNO OF ORY AIR | RELATIVE HUMIDITY OF AIR AT VARIOUS TEMP- 
| SATURATEO ERATURE 


FIGURES I AND II 


о 


the relative humidity is only 2.97 рег cent. 
Curve B shows the dehumidification effect 
of heating 35 deg. F. and 60 per cent sat- 
urated air to 70 deg. F. Comparison ot 
Curves А and B indicates that generally, 
the colder the weather experienced. the 
more dry will be the air condition in an 
artificially heated structure. 

'The most serious physiological effect of 
dry air is the drying of the delicate mucous 
membrane of the upper respiratory tract. 
When these delicate tissues become dry, 
they no longer function normally with the 
result that resistance to resiratory diseases 
is materially lowered. Other physiological 


|: 


w 
а 
5 
E 
< 
£ 
ш 
а 
2 
ш 
- 
т 
3 4 
> 
x 
в 


ORY BULB TEMPERATURE TO GIVE AN EFFECTIVE TEMPERATURE 
OF 66 OEG. AT VARIOUS RELATIVE HUMIDITIES. 


FIGURE III 


effects are rough, or cracked skin, and dull 
and brittle hair. Very dry air also has a 
deleterious effect upon furniture and fur- 
nishings. By absorbing the moisture from 
wood and glue it causes table-tops and 
panels to crack, joints, legs and rungs to 
fall apart, and the varnished surfaces to 
check and chip. It causes the nap on rugs 
to become brittle and wear off prematurely. 
Paintings parch and peal. 

At temperatures above 46 deg. F., hu- 
midity also makes every dry-bulb tempera- 
ture condition feel warmer. Dry air at 
relatively high temperature may feel cooler 
than more humid air of considerably lower 
temperature. Fig. 3 shows the dry-bulb 
temperatures at various relative humidities 
required to produce a thermo equivalent 
condition of 66 deg. effective temperature. 
The curve shows that if the relative humid- 
ity is increased from 10 per cent to 50 per 
cent, the temperature may be reduced from 
74.3 deg. F. to 70 deg. F. without decreas- 
ing the feeling of warmth. 

Although heat is required to evaporate 
water for artificial humidification, the de- 
crease in building heat losses resulting from 
carrying lower room temperatures effects a 
considerable net saving in fuel. As humid- 
ifiers reduce fuel consumption as well as 
create more healthful and more desirable 
air conditions, they may be advantageously 
applied to any heating system. 

А humidifier consisting of a small gas 
fired warm air furnace equipped with spray 
nozzles, has been designed and used effec- 
tively on the East Coast. The heating ele- 
ment of the furnace is constructed of 
chrome nickel steel to resist corrosion. 
Spray nozzles connected to the city water 
supply spray water into the hottest por- 
tion of the furnace where it is evaporated. 
This humidifier is placed in the basement 
and connected to the first floor by means of 
only one or two warm air leader pipes and 
of course the necessary cold air return 
pipes. The warm humid air produced by 
the humidifier is delivered to the rooms in 
which the registers are located ,where it 
rapidly diffuses throughout the building. 
These humidifiers may be effectively in- 
stalled in small buildings. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 60 > OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Another possibility for use under similar 
circumstances, is that of connecting a radi- 
ator type humidifier to a gas-fired storage 
water heater. The radiator humidifier is 
placed centrally in a residence or other 
similar small structure, care being taken 
not to place it adjacent to cold exposed 
surfaces, such as windows or exterior walls, 
which would cause the moisture evaporated 
by the humidifier to condense upon it and 
create a nuisance. The radiator or heating 
element of the humidifier is connected with 
a flow and return pipe to a storage water 
heater in the same manner that this appli- 
ance would be connected in an enclosed 
two pipe gravity hot water heating system. 
The radiator element is heated by gravity 
circulation of hot water supplied by the 
water heater. Water for humidification is 
supplied by a branch from the city water 
house line. This water flows over the hot 
radiator sections which heats it and causes 
it to vaporize. Any surplus water drains 
to the sewer. Control of the relative humid- 
ity of the air in the structure in which 
the humidifier is located may be accom- 
plished by a hydrostat operating a motor 
valve placed either on the hot water circu- 
lating line or upon the cold water supply 
line. 

Humidifying devices consisting of water 
pans placed in warm air furnace casings 
have been used for many years. However, 
the University of Illinois Bulletin No. 48 
states that none of the various types which 
they tested proved adequate to evaporate 
sufficient water to maintain 40 per cent rel- 
ative humidity in the Research Residence, 
except only in moderately cold weather. 
Similar tests on water pans incorporated in 
radiator shields and formerly popular for 
use in steam and hot water heating systems 
proved that these devices were as inade- 
quate as the warm air furnace water pans. 

The latest developments in winter humid- 
ification devices for use in residences, are 
the radiator humidifier previously described 
and the air washer and blower combina- 
tion type humidifier. The former is used 
where steam or hot water heating systems 
are installed and the latter where warm air 
furnace heating systems are installed. Air 
washers have been used in large ventilating 


installations to provide artificial humidifica- 
tion for many years. However, it has only 
been recently that very small air washers 
suitable for use in residences and very small 
buildings have been developed. 

In winter, when one enters a heated 
structure some of the clothing is removed 
to prevent overheating and conversely, on 
leaving a heated structure additional cloth- 
ing is put on to prevent chill. In other 
words, the amount of insulation covering 
the body is varied to compensate for the 
change in temperature of the air surround- 
ing it. Except for the upper respiratory 
tract which is not protected by clothing. 
this offers a satisfactory and sufficiently 
flexible means of compensating for the 
rapid and extreme changes in temperature 
experienced on entering or leaving artifi- 
cially heated structures in winter. 

Аза minimum of clothing is required for 
comfort in a conditioned space in summer, 
it is evident that a change in weight of 
clothing cannot be used to compensate for 
the rapid change in temperature experi- 
enced on entering or leaving a conditioned 
building. Therefore, the heat regulating 
mechanisms of the body alone must com- 
pensate for this sudden change. If the 
change in temperature is considerable, the 
human body will require as much as two 
hours to adjust itself to the new condition. 
Except in buildings where the occupants do 
not enter or leave when the outside tem- 
perature is considerably above the summer 
optimum temperature for comfort, the most 


HYGROSTAT 


HUMIDIFIER 


ШЕН (| eium imam (L.C ЕЕ =й 
| А 0 H u | Й у 


DIAGRAMATIG ЅКЕТСН OF НОТ WATER PIPING AND HUMIDITY 
CONTROL FOR RADIATOR HUMIDIFIER AND STORAGE WATER 
HEATER. 


FIGURE V 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 61 в OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


u 
(о) 
ш 
e 
E 
= 
a 
P 
< 
[a 4 
ш ! 
а. | 
>, 
ш 
Е- 
ul. 
e 
72) 
= 
[^4 
uJ 
a 
о 
a 
a 


77770 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 
l OUTSIDE TEMPERATURE ІМ DEG.F. 
i PROPER INSIDE TEMPERATURE WHEN VAR 


70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 
OUTSIDE TEMPERATURE ІМ DEG.F. 
PROPER INSIDE RELATIVE HUMIDITIES CORRES- 


PONDING WITH PROPER INSIDE TEMPERATURES 
SHOWN IN FIG.6. 


FIGURES VI AND VII 


1005 OUTSIDE TEMPERATURES PREVAIL 
satisfactory inside temperature is a com- 
promise between the optimum summer tem- 
perature and the prevailing outside temper- 
ature. In other words, optimum comfort 
after acclimatization is partially sacrificed 
so as to prevent harmful shock immediately 
following entrance into or exit from a con- 
ditioned space. In winter it is proper to 
maintain the interior of a structure at a 
constant optimum condition irrespective of 
the prevailing outside condition; however, 
the proper inside condition in summer is a 
variable changing with changes in the out- 
side condition. Proper inside temperatures 
for corresponding outside temperatures 
are shown by the curve in Fig. 6. 

As air is cooled, its relative humidity in- 
creases. Since an increase in relative hu- 
midity makes any dry bulb temperature feel 
warmer, it is evident that the cooling effect 
on the human body resulting only from 


lowering the dry bulb temperature is less 
than might be expected. This counter cool- 


ing effect which results when air is cooled 
necessitates relatively large reductions in 
dry bulb temperature in order to obtain 
satisfactory reductions in effective temper- 
ature, with the result that a damp humid 
condition conducive to shock and chill is 
created. It is therefore evident that de- 
humidification as well as cooling is required 
in summer air conditioning. 
Dehumidification is a very important 
means of cooling because its cooling effect 
depends upon the emission of perspiration 
by the human body itself. When emissions 
of perspiration cease, the cooling effect of 
reasonably dry air also ceases, and when 
emissions of perspiration take place, the 
cooling effect is somewhat in proportion to 
the flow. Thus, dehumidification allows 
one to personally regulate their evaporative 
heat loss which should be a considerable 
portion of the total heat loss, in summer. 
By this means conditions comfortable to 
both warm blooded people and people less 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER 4 62 » OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


warm blooded may be created. Proper rel- 
ative humidities are shown by the curve in 
Fig. 17. 

Dehumidification may be accomplished 
in several ways. The method most com- 
monly used in the past being that of passing 
air through cold water sprays. These 
sprays cool the air below its dewpoint tem- 
perature with the result that a portion of its 
moisture content is condensed out. This 
cold air having a lower absolute humidity 
is then reheated by mixing it with some 
warm air, by heating it directly with steam 
or hot water coils, or by a combination of 
both. More recently means for accomplish- 
ing dehumidification separately from cool- 
ing have been developed. 

Silica gel is a hard, glassy material with 
the appearance of clear quartz sand, made 
by treating sodium silicate with acid. Из 
chemical analysis is exactly the same as 
sand-silicon dioxide, but unlike sand, 
highly porous. These pores are so small 
that they cannot be seen, but it is certain 
that they exist due to the way the gel acts. 
For example, a quantity of Silica Gel 
placed above water in a closed vessel will 
absorb, or take up, water vapor to the ex- 
tent of 40 per cent of its own weight, and 
the "gel" will appear perfectly dry and will 
not have increased in volume. If the "gel" 
is brought in contact with sufficiently hot 
air, this water vapor will be reabsorbed by 
the hot air, and the gel will be rendered 
capable of absorbing a like quantity of 
moisture again. This cycle can go on in- 
definitely without impairing the efficiency 
of the Silica Gel. 

With the assistance of the Industrial 
Research Committee of the American Gas 
Association, Silica Gel dehumidification 
equipment for summer air conditioning has 
been developed. The cycle of operation is 
shown in Fig. 8. Outside air is drawn 
through beds of Silica Gel placed in trays. 
Assuming that the temperature of the out- 
side air entering the gel beds at A is 90 
deg. F., the temperature of the dried air 
emitted from the beds at B will be at a con- 
siderably higher temperature, say 125 deg. 
F. This hot bone dry air and the warm 
moist air from the house is mixed at the 
suction of the fan C. The mixture is cooled 


TG 
ACTIVATION EXHAUST © i FRESH AIR INLET 


WARM MOIST AIR f ROM 
HOUSE 


ACTIVATION FAN F 


COOL ORY AIR 
10 HOUSE 


SILICA GEL 
DEHUMIGIFIER 


UNIT NO | UNIT NO 2 


ACTIVATION FURNACE Е |], 


cum О O- GAS SUPPLY O. Я 3 қ i 
ТО FIG 8 OAGRAMMATIC FLOW CHART OF SILICA GEL DEHUMIDIFICATION 


T AND CITY WATER COOLING APPARATUS 


FIGURE УШ 


in the cooler D and then delivered to the 
space being conditioned. The coolers used 
in the eastern test installations are coils 
supplied with cold water from the city 
supply. 

While the dehumidification cycle is tak- 
ing place in Unit No. 1, Unit No. 2 is being 
reactivated. Air from outside is drawn 
through a gas flame in furnace E by the re- 
activating fan Е. The mixture of air and 
products of combustion leaves the furnace 
at a temperature of 300 deg. F., and enters 
the gel beds. This hot air causes the gel 
to give up its moisture to it. The absorp- 
tion of moisture reduces the temperature of 
the drying air, so that when it is exhausted 
outside at G, its temperature is only 125 to 


MOTOR VALVE STEAM JET VACUUM PUMP 


esae TOWER 


і 
А | 


im 
S 


= 


ЛЛУ ЛУ! 


4 


е сЕ 
ta 


‚+144 
shada 

e 
— 


% 


| A 


| сого WATER | СОО LO WATER STORAGE = 
ше e мя COOLER 
— , 


COOL DRY AIR TO HOUSE — 
се. ар 


"BOWER FEED PUMP 


[FRESH AIR INLET 


WARM MOIST AIR FROM 
HOUSE 


FIG 9 OIAGRAMMATIC SKETCH OF STEAM INJECTION VACUUM REFRIGERATION APPARATUS 


FIGURE IV 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER <@ 63 > OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


150 deg. F.. When the gel has been thor- 
oughly dried the furnace burner is turned 
off and dampers change the air flow, so 
that air is circulated from the beds through 
cooler H and back to the gel bed over and 
over again. The water discharged from 
cooler D supplies cooler Н. When Unit 
No. 1 becomes nearly saturated with water 
vapor, Unit No. 2 is put in service, and 
Unit No. 1 is reactivated. 

Silica Gel does not extract any heat from 
the air; it merely extracts moisture from it 
and transfers the latent heat of the mois- 
ture removed to the resulting dry air. This 
transfer of heat energy causes the tempera- 


ACTIVATION EXHAUST FRESH AIR INLET 


WARM MOIST AIR FROM 
HOUSE 
Exe 


ACTIVATION FAN 


COOL DRY АЯ 
TO HOUSE 


AIR WASHER 
HUMIOIFIER 


X 
ACTNATION FURNAGE |. , 


И шы ce e эш э 
FIG tO DIAGRAMMATIC FLOW CHART OF SILICA GEL OEHUMIDIFICATION 
t 


ANO EVAPORATIVE COOLING APPARATUS 


ЫСИВЕ Х 


ture of the dry air to rise considerably, 
although its total heat remains identical to 
the total heat of the original untreated rela- 
tively cool moist air. However, due to its 
relatively high temperature, it is easy to 
very cheaply extract this heat and reduce 
its temperature to a point at least as low as 
the original untreated moist air. 

The silica gel air conditioning installa- 
tions made in the East use city water in the 
cooling coils to remove the latent heat 
emitted by the extracted moisture and to 
cool the air to the desired temperature. А 
cheap supply of sufficiently cool water is 
essential to make such a procedure prac- 
tical. The city water supply of the locali- 
ties on the Pacific Coast that have warm 
summer climates and hence a real need for 
summer air conditioning, is neither suffi- 


ciently cheap nor sufficiently cold to make 
possible the use of apparatus of a similar 
type here. 


The type of apparatus that will probably 
prove more suitable for Pacific Coast con- 
ditions is a ramification of the Silica Gel 
apparatus, such as is shown in Fig. 10. 
The two dehydration units, the reactivat- 
ing apparatus and the cycle of operations 
is the same, the major difference being the 
means of cooling the air. The hot bone dry 
air from the dehumidifier is cooled to ap- 
proximately the temperature of the untreat- 
ed moist air by passing it through the cooler 
A. This cooler consists of pipe coils with 
extended surfaces. These coils extract the 
latent heat liberated by the extracted mois- 
ture, so that although the temperaure may 
not be less than the original moist air, its 
total heat has been greatly reduced. Due 
to the fact that the dry air leaves the de- 
humidifier at a relatively high temperature, 
and that it is not essential to cool it below 
the prevailing outside temperature, water 
circulated over a cooling tower may be 
used in the cooling coils. This offers a very 
inexpensive means Írom an operating cost 
standpoint of dissipating the latent heat of 
the extracted moisture. The cost of a small 
amount of power to pump the water 
through the coils and over the tower, and 
the cost of a small amount of make up water 
to replace that evaporated in the tower are 
the only operating costs entailed. To still 
further cool the air, it is passed through an 
air washer type humidifier. The air being 
very dry readily absorbs moisture, and as 
the latent heat of evaporation is taken from 
the air, its temperature is reduced. The 
amount of cooling being proportional to the 
amount of moisture absorbed. In this way, 
the Silica Gel apparatus may be made to 
cool as well as dehumidify the air in a con- 
ditioned space. 


Disregarding the small amount of auxil- 
iary power required to operate the cooling 
water pump and the activating fan, the 
operating efficiency of the Silica Gel appa- 
ratus is approximately 67 per cent. This 
relatively high operating efficiency, coupled 
with the relatively low cost of gas fuel, in- 
sures low operating costs. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 64 > OCTOBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


« « « « With the Architects ху» 


PROVISIONAL CERTIFICATES GRANTED 

At the regular meeting of the California State 
Board of Architectural Examiners, Nothern Dis- 
trict, the following were granted provisional cer- 
tificates to practice architecture in the State of 
California: 

Lloyd Ashley Rasmussen, 3512 Geary Street, 
San Francisco. 

Theodore Gottfried Ruegg. 1515 Tyler Street, 
Berkeley. 

Edward В. French, Jr., Public Works Office, 
Mare Island. Vallejo. 


CONCRETE OFFICE BUILDING 

Plans are being prepared in the office of Martin 
J. Rist, Phelan Building. San Francisco, for a tour 
story and basement Class B store and office build- 
ing to be erected on the northwest corner of Co- 
lumbus Avenue and Green Street, San Francisco, 
for J. Capurro, 874 Green Street, San Francisco. 
The cost is estimated at $50,000. Mr. Rist has 
also made preliminary plans for a community 
hospital in Watsonville to cost $165,000. 


CHURCH GROUP 

Milton W. Morrison, architect, 601-42nd Ave- 
nue, San Francisco, is completing plans for the 
first unit of a religious group of buildings in San 
Francisco. Only the Sunday school unit will be 
built at the present time. This will consist of an 
auditorium, guild hall and clubrooms. The church 
will be built later on. All of the buildings are 
being designed in the Mediterranean style of 
architecture. 


MUNICIPAL PROJECTS 

Several large building projects for the City and 
County of San Francisco, are expected to be 
underway shortly, bonds for the work having been 
sold. The improvements will include a psycho- 
pathic ward building and a cancer institute at the 
City and County Hospital, the two structures to 
cost $700.000; also. a new county jail for which 
plans are being completed and for which $700.000 
is available. 


OAKLAND RESIDENCE 
Henry H. Gutterson has completed plans for 
a large residence on Stonewall Road, Oakland. 
for F. B. Henderson, Jr., 2741 Garber Street. 
Berkeley. The house will cost in the neighborhood 
of $16.000. 


The Architect and Engineer. October, 1932 


SUNNYVALE AIR BASE 

The Dinwiddie Construction Company of San 
Francisco has been awarded a contract by the 
Federal government to complete the hangar at 
Sunnyvale, together with the erection of a gaso- 
line and helium pump house, on a bid of $222,600. 
The contract involves more than 280,000 square 
feet of concrete work. 


GRACE CATHEDRAL UNIT 


Construction was started during the current 
month on another unit of Grace Cathedral at Cal- 
ifornia and Mason Streets, San Francisco, from 
plans by Lewis P. Hobart, architect of San Fran- 
cisco. The structural engineer is T. Ronneberg 
and the contractors, the Dinwiddie Construction 
Company. The estimated cost is $100,000. 


W. H. WEEKS BUSY 

New work in the office of W. H. Weeks and 
associates, 525 Market Street, San Francisco, in- 
cludes a thirteen story Medico-Dental building 
at Grand Avenue and Harrison Street, Oakland, 
estimated to cost $250,000, a market building in 
Oakland and a new heating plant for the Science 
Building of the Santa Rosa Junior High School. 


SACRAMENTO GARAGE 


Plans have been completed and construction 
bids have been taken for a one story brick garage 
to be built on J Street, Sacramento, for С. Dal- 
losta. Charles F. Dean is the architect. Mr. Dean 
is also the architect of a Spanish home to be 
built in Oroville for A. J. Milns. 


TWO CONTRACTS AWARDED 


Messrs. Dragon and Schmidts of Berkeley, have 
awarded two construction contracts during the 
past month. One is for a one story brick veneer 
grammar school building at Ben Lomand and the 
other a two story Spanish style residence in San 
Anselmo for J. Angeli. 


HAROLD STONER BUSY 
New work in the office of Harold D. Stoner, 
810 Ulloa Street, San Francisco, includes a $12.- 
000 brick veneer English residence in Sherwood 
Forrest, San Francisco, for J. B. Biddle, and a 
Spanish dwelling in Edgewood Drive, San Mateo, 
for Charles McIntyre. 


ВАУ BRIDGE ASSURED 

"Bridge the Bay" seems destined soon to be a 
reality. The Federal government will loan $62,- 
000.000 to finance the project, the remaining $8,- 
000,000 required to meet the engineer's estimate, 
to be appropriated by the California State High- 
way Commission. The building of the longest 
bridge in the world should bring good times to the 
San Francisco Bay District, in fact it should bene- 
fit the entire Pacific Coast. 

Attached to the agreement to buy the bonds 
is a condition that California, through its High- 
way Commission, shall not only supply the addi- 
tional $8,000,000 but shall enter into a contract 
to maintain and operate the bridge throughout the 
life of the bonds so that the gross revenue of the 
property may be devoted to payment of interest 
and retirement of the bonds. 

The bonds will be purchased from time to time 
as funds are needed for construction. The pro- 
ject is the largest self liquidating construction that 
Uncle Sam yet has agreed to finance. The 
bridge will be 41 miles long, double deck, with 
six high speed lanes on one deck and three slow 
lanes on the other. Space also will be provided 
for two interurban tracks or two extra truck lanes. 

Should it be decided later to provide interurban 
facilities, the bridge officials estimate that two 
tracks, equipment and appurtenances can be pro- 
vided at an expenditure of $10,000,000. 

This would be financed by a toll of 1 per cent 
per passenger or a total one-way fare of 21 cents 
and with available automobile traffic it was esti- 
mated that the bonds can be redeemed in twenty- 
five years. 

Work is expected to be started on the west bay 
superstructure within the next three months. This 
portion of the bridge, to cost $16,600,000, can be 
advertised, it was said, within sixty days. The 
east bay superstructure, to cost $8,900,000, will 
require ninety days. 

Éngineers estimate foundations for the bridge 
will cost $15,240,000. Bids for this will be adver- 
tised as soon as the State Legislature acts in re- 
gard to the contingencies specified by the Recon- 
struction Corporation. 

The bridge bond authorization is the largest 
yet made by the Corporation for a self-liquidating 
project. The next in size is the agreement entered 
into to purchase $40,000,000 of bonds of the 
Southern California Water District in order to 
get work started on the $235,000,000 project 
bringing Colorado river water to the Los Angeles 
area, me 
THEATER ALTERATIONS 

Arthur O. Johnson, architect, Sir Francis Drake 
Hotel, San Francisco, has prepared plans for al- 
terations to the theater on Broadway, west of 
Grant Avenue, San Francisco, for B. Huth. 


66 


ARCHITECTS DISCUSS MURALS 

Mural painting was the subject for discussion 
at the regular monthly meeting of the Southern 
California Chapter, American Institute of Archi- 
tects, September 13. 

Dean Cornwell, of New York City, who is do- 
ing the murals for the Los Angeles Public Library, 
described some of the problems an artist has to 
contend with in mural work and gave an explana- 
tion of the assignment he is working on at the 
present time. 

Julian E. Garnsey and Lucille Lloyd spoke on 
the subject of murals, the former giving an inter- 
esting account of Mr. Cornwell's development of 
the Los Angeles library problem. 

Samuel Armstrong, who did the mural work for 
the new Edward L. Doheny, Junior, Memorial 
Library at the University of Southern California, 
spoke briefly. 

Doctor Eugene Gustav Steinhof, director of the 
National School of Decorative Art at Vienna, and 
a well known sculptor, architect and educator, 
gave a short talk. 

The speakers were introduced by Carleton M. 
Winslow and Samuel E. Lunden. Sumner M. 
Spaulding, vice-president of the Chapter, presided. 


SEATTLE ARCHITECTS MEET 

Political speeches dominated the opening fall 
meeting of the Washington State Chapter, A.LA., 
September 8. The prize effort was delivered by 
Arthur L. Loveless, who told how the “Old Cor- 
рег” could be turned and everybody made happy 
and prosperous again. 

Committees soon will have announcements 
ready covering the year's activities under the di- 
rection of President J. Lister Holmes. At the meet- 
ing on October 6 Kenneth Anderson, senior in 
architecture at the University of Washington, re- 
lated some of his experiences and observations 
while in Europe. 


ARCHITECT EXHIBITS WORK 

Edwin J. Ivey, architect, of Seattle, recently 
held an exhibit of his work on the ground floor 
of the Northern Life Tower. Photographs of сот- 
pleted work included the new Seattle Children’s 
Home on Queen Anne Hill, and the remodeled 
Shorrock residence. Sketches for prospective re- 
tainers included a $75,000 English Tudor resi- 
dence at American Lake, a Norman style mansion 
at Yarrow on the east side of Lake Washington, 
and a French Mansard house at Laurelhurst. 


RESIDENCE WORK 
John E. Dinwiddie, architect, 2816 Prince 
Street, Berkeley, is at work on plans for a group 
of dwellings in St. Francis Wood, San Francisco, 
for A. J. Wilbie. The houses will cost from $5500 
to $6500 each. 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


А 
American Ма: Бе о 86 
атест Kollin АИ и 87 
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. ............ 5 
Anderson and RINgrOSE ..............................-..... 92 
Apes МЕ, (Сб, cce A 90 
B 
Ва Нешел Paint Со. ...........-.—-.-.----- Back Cover 
Bay State Brick & Cement Coating ................ 81 
Draun-Steeple Co., НС... 90 
нохт Јем Co, G а 83 
Bates Carpenter (Glos coc 90 
С 
(Серое ее, Зе 78 
({ “Шога Sales со 81 
California Shade Cloth Co., Іпс. .................. 83 
(ати Sons, Ма 7 
Clervi Marble & Mosaic Со. .....................-....- 89 
Clintont Construction о... 85 
Cook Mabie Co, Кау....................................- 87 
(гапе COMPANY .................................................. 88 
НІЛ ше Teee a 79 
р 
Davey Iree Surgery Co., Ltd. eee 2 
Oo oel Products Co. cossis 91 
Del Monte Properties s 86 
Diskeyi Cly Mfp- Со, W. 9. 86 
Dinwiddie Construction Со. ....................-.-.--- 92 
Drafting & Engineering Service ...................... 86 
F 
Rinkka серпе бо е 89 
Eorderen Cornice мо 88 
Еепезва Ses) ЗАЕМ ооо ee 91 
: G 
Carnett Young & Company ...........................- 88 
(Gesner oon: CO. cc RETRO ETE 90 
Cladding КС. 86 
Gladding McBean ё? Co. .......................... 8 
(Басе орпа 80 
Grinnell Company of the Pacific ...................- 87 
бап (Cavdle O Сошрапу. ..................................- 85 
н 
Humo 8 Co, В. А 91 
Haws Sanitary Drinking Faucet Co. ...............- 75 
Holmes Eureka Lumber Со. .......................... 87 
Hunt (Сә, Robert W. 2.2.00. 88 
шет чазо 89 
] 
]emsem, (Съ ТЫУА С ОРНА 90 
ооо Go Sy iy ee 92 
Johnson Service Фо 3 
або, Рае (Clo, ае 84 
K 
Kewanee Boiler Corp. .........---..---.--.-...---.---------- 86 
asorar Ue, oq. eee 85 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


Index to Advertising Announcements 


For Classified List of Advertisers see Pages 93, 94, 95 


*Appears alternate months 
PP 


L 
Larsen €r Larsen. coe ER Е 88 
Шертер МНЕ halls (ОЙ. iue 92 
Lesher A Me ERR 85 
Lindgren & Swinerton, Inc. ........................ 80 
M 
Мас Donal dacs Kahn „о 2 
MacGruer Со ы 84 
McClintic-Marshall Со... 87 
MeNear Brick Со. eO 90 
Mercury Ре 87 
Michel Б Re fer eee E 87 
Mueller Go. 25-22. ee MS 90 
Mullen Manufacturing Co. а... 90 
Musto Sons Keenan Co., Joseph ...................... 86 
N 
Nason с Co IR N 79 
National Lead Company ....................---- Back Cover 
О 
Ocean Shore Iron ИС 89 
Otis Elevator Company ........................... 2nd Cover 
P 
Pacific Coast Engineering Co. su 92 
Pacific Coast Eelectrical Bureau ........................ 6 
Pacific Coast Gas Association .................. 84 
Расе Соз Әже! огр ERE 77 
ее оор (С) и 75 
PacineiManufictunn LEa 91 
Тре е ея Сес RR 79 
Pacific Portland Cement Со. ................... 96 
Palace Hardware Со о н 91 
Рага ие Companies aeee. ee ОННИНОНИА 1 
Parkeri Соз Пп КОЕ: PN 89 
Picardi Inc УИ сс c 88 
Q 
Quandi ea Sons A о т мы 91 
R 
Кавал S34 S ЛК тн 89 
Nepublicestee бе nn 92 
S 
Sandoval Sales Фо 90 
Santa Fe Lumber Company ............................ 91 
Sisalkraft (Co, Р OT 88 
Sloane, Wate: 2.2.2. ты 84 
Stanley Works ве 82 
Steelform Contracting Co. ...................2.. 91 
Stockholmi 0 Sons eS 86 
Sunset Lumber о 91 
T 
Tormey Company, Ны 88 
У 
Volkert Con Woor 89 
Vaughan:C ЕЛЕС нн 83 
w 
Wells Fargo Bank ea e НИНЕНЕНИНИНИИИ 82 
Western топот RE 92 
Wood Lumber Con ES c 85 
ae 
Young е Мол E 87 


BOOK REVIEWS 
By agar A Kerullf 


А METHOD ОЕ PROCEDURE AND 
CHECKING SCHEDULE FOR PLAN- 
NING SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND THEIR 
EQUIPMENT, by John J. Donovan, АЛА. 
Published by The Bruce Publishing Co., New 
York. Price $6.50. 

We have just received from the Bruce Publish- 
ing Company, Milwaukee, a copy of Mr. Dono- 
van's new book, "A Method of Procedure and 
Checking Schedule for Planning School Build- 
ings’ and as we glance through the pages are 
amazed with the volume of valuable information 
contained in this book and also with the tremen- 
dous amount of research work necessary to pro- 
duce it. 

As the preface states, this book is intended to 
enable the architect, the superintendent of schools 
or the educational planner, singly or jointly to 
first of all properly and adequately state the prob- 
lem and the purpose of the school, then to enable 
the superintendent of schools to check the pre- 
liminary drawings with the architect or by him- 
self, against the statement of the problem; then 
to check once more the working drawings and 
specifications against both the statement of the 
problem and the preliminary drawings. Also, the 
book will be helpful to the clerk of the works 
or the inspector on the building to work with the 
drawings and establish heights and check dimen- 
sions of important standard features of the school 
building such as heights of chalk rails, hand rails, 
drinking fountains for the different grades, toilet 
fixtures, etc. 

In addition, the book undoubtedly will be used 
as a record book for each building for the rec- 
ords and statistical data pertaining to the build- 
ing and personnel connected with the project is 
so orderly arranged and so complete in its outline 
that the book will save both architect and school 
official a great deal of time during the construc- 
tion of the work and afterwards as well as it 
provides a record form of the job, the personnel 
and dates which information has been very much 
needed in the past. 

'The book will serve as a manual for the draft- 
ing room. It will enable the draftsman to work 
with intelligence, as the book delves deeply into 
the whys and wherefores and gives concrete in- 
formation as to equipment, size of rooms, mate- 
rials to be used and many such similar sugges- 


68 


tions. l'he chapter on the Auditorium is an ex- 
cellent example of the completeness of the book. 
There the author deals in simple language and sets 
forth understandable statements as to the methods 
to obtain proper sight lines for the seating, the 
method of forming the saucer-like shape orches 
tra floor and the equipment for the stage and pro- 
jector booth. It is very noticeable that the author 
has constantly in mind the values of good acousti- 
cal treatment not only for the auditorium but also 
for other parts of the school. 

Its preparation is considerably different to that 
of the author's previous book, "School Architec- 
ture” published by MacMillan, which will always 
be a valuable book as it was written, setting forth 
as it does the fundamental principles pertaining 
to educational methods and systems of the differ- 
ent types of schools, then the building and equip- 
ment described and shown to fit the several edu- 
cational systems. That is true also of this book, 
only it is done in a different and more concise 
manner. The several departments of the school, 
only a few of which will be mentioned here, such 
as the Music Department, Art Department, Home 
Economics, Commercial, Science, Cafeteria, Phys- 
ical Education—are minutely outlined with sug- 
gestions and valuable data. 

This book will enable the architect to under- 
stand his school problem better; it will be a hand 
book for the superintendent of schools and it will 
be a valuable help to the heads of the several 
departments of the different types of schools. It 
is a valuable contribution to architecture and to 
education and undoubtedly will receive a hearty 
welcome. 


THE CHINA ARCHITECTS AND BUILD- 
ERS COMPENDUM, Edited by J. T. W. 
Brooke, A.R.I.B.A., апа В. W. Davis. Eighth 
issue. Published by North-China Daily News 
and Herold, Ltd., Shanghai, China. No price 
given. 

Like its predecessors, this compendum is well 
arranged and printed and contains vital informa- 
tion to the architect in the Orient or those who 
contemplate establishing a practice in the North 
is to be appropriated by the California State High- 
tones. The brochure contains detailed informa- 
tion regarding the latest addition to building 
materials. 


THE DESIGN OF LETTERING, by Egon 
Weiss. Published by The Pencil Points Press, 
Inc., New York. Price $5.00. 


There have been several books on lettering that 
have passed through the reviewer's hands, each 


The Architcct and Engineer, October, 1932 


possessing merit in some particular, but Мг. 
Weiss’ book is one of the best. 

It is artistically arranged and beautifully printed 
and bound. The subject matter is well thought 
out and the illustrations are admirable. There is 
a short historical outline of the art of lettering, 
followed by chapters on Spacing, Fundamentals 
of Lettering, then in order follow the various al- 
phab«s:s, a chapter on Considerations of Design 
and one on Lettering in Materials; also a short 
chapter on Color and Drawing for Reproduction. 

Architects and architectural students should find 
this an invaluable adjunct to their libraries and 
a constant source of pleasure in the mere posses- 
sion of such a volume. 


URBAN LAND USES (An Aid to Scientific 
Zoning Practice). Volume IV of the Harvard 
City Planning Studios, by Harland Bartholo- 
mew. Published by the Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge, Mass. Price $3.50. 


As stated above, this volume constitutes the 
tourth in this very fine and exhaustive series of 
studies on city planning and its manifold rami- 
fications. The reviewer must confess to so lim- 
ited a knowledge of the technicalities of zoning 
and city planning as renders him unable to say 
that the series, or this book in particular, is the 
best of its kind, but a due consideration of the 
source of the studies leads one to believe that it 
is among the best. The book is well illustrated 
and contains a series of charts and tabulations of 
interest. City planning commissions and architects 
should be primarily interested. 


BUILDERS EXCHANGE MEETING 

Ralph E. Homann of Los Angeles was elected 
president of the California State Builders Ex- 
change at the sixth annual convention at Stockton 
September 30 and October 1. Other officers 
chosen are: first vice-president, P. M. Sanford, 
Richmond; second vice-president, Chas. W. Pet- 
tifer, Long Beach; third vice-president, L. S. Ре]- 
etz, Stockton; fourth vice-president, H. L. Swee- 
ney, Santa Barbara; secretary, Frederic Sanford, 
Santa Ana; treasurer, C. M. Gilbert, Santa Ana. 

Members of the new board of directors are 
as follows: H. C. Anderson, Berkeley; W. H. 
George, San Francisco; C. M. Gilbert, Santa Ana; 
G. A. Graham, Bakersfield; Ralph E. Homann, 
Los Angeles; Wm. T. Loesch, Pasadena; C. E. 
McMullin, Fresno; L. S. Peletz, Stockton; Chas. 
W. Pettifer, Long Beach; P. M. Sanford, Rich- 
mond; H. W. Sweeney, Santa Barbara. 

It was decided to hold the next semi-annual 
convention in Los Angeles in March, 1933. The 
next quarterly meeting of the board of directors 
is scheduled for December, 1932, at Fresno, the 
date to be announced later. 


The Architect and Engineer. October, 1932 


PERSONAL 

Baker, VocEL and Воизн, Seattle, have moved 
their office from 321 to 422 Smith Tower, Seattle. 
They have plans under way for a fraternity house 
at 18th Avenue N. E. and E 50th Street. 

ALBAN А. Suay, of Seattle, has moved his office 
to 523 Skinner Building. He formerly was located 
on the third floor. 

Vas Stimson, member of the Seattle archi- 
tectural firm of Stimson and McDonald, was an 
honorary guest at the midsummer dedication of the 
new Masonic Temple at Port Townsend, which 
his firm designed. 


DRAWS BRIDGE PERSPECTIVES 

C. Raymond Butcher, having been commissioned 
by the city engineer of Spokane to make two large 
airplane perspective drawings of the proposed 
Oak-to-Ash Street bridge and the Sixth Avenue 
intersection, submitted two fine drawings 4^ by 6' 
each, in charcoal and carbon pencil. Spokane 
Chamber of Commerce officials look upon the 
project as a needed city improvement. 


COLOR WATERPROOFING 

The Master Builders Company of Cleveland, 
Ohio, have issued a short brochure dealing with 
their latest product, Omicron, a colored water- 
proofing. It is a pure stearate liquid waterproof- 
ing in which is incorporated color in non-fading 
tones. The brochure contains all the detailed in- 
formation regarding the latest addition to build- 
ing materials. 


LOS ANGELES SCHOOL BUILDING 

Plans have been completed for a two story 
frame and concrete school building and alterations 
to the auditorium of the school at 1521 North 
Highland Avenue, Los Angeles, the architects 
being Messrs. March, Smith & Powell, Archi- 
tects’ Building, Los Angeles. 


VACATIONING ABROAD 
David R. Myers, associated with his father, 
David J. Myers, Central Building, Seattle, is 
spending six months in Europe studying archi- 
tectural monuments at first hand. He left for Eng- 
land in June. Before returning in December he 
will visit France, Switzerland and Italy. 


STORE ALTERATIONS 
Alterations have been completed to a store at 
508 Sutter Street, San Francisco, from plans by 
Messrs. Kent and Haas, Underwood Building, San 
Francisco. The John B. Rex Furniture Company 
will occupy the premises. 


69 


Estimator's Guide 


Giving Cost of Building Materials, Wage Scale, Etc. 


Amounts quoted are figuring prices and are made up from average quotations 
furnished by material houses to three leading contracting firms of San Francisco. 


АП prices and wages quoted are for 
San Francisco and the Bay District. 
There may be slight fluctuation of 
prlees in the interior and southern 
part of the state. Freight cartage, at 
least, must be added in figuring coun- 
try work. 

Overtime in wage scale should be 
credited with time and a half, Sunday 
and holidays double. 


Bond—114% amount of contract. 


Brick work— 

Conimon, $26 to $32 per 1000 laid, 
(according to class of work). 

Face, $60 to $80 per 1000 laid, (ac- 
cording to class of work). 

Brick Steps, using pressed brick, 
$.85 lin. ft. 

Brick Walls, using pressed brick on 
edge, 55с sq. ft. (Foundations ех- 


tra.) 

Brick Veneer on frame buildings, 
$.60 sq. ft. 

Common, f. о. b. cars, $14.00 plus 
cartage. 


Face, f.0.b. cars, $38.00 per 1000, 
carload lots. 

HOLLOW TILE FIREPROOFING (í.o.b. job) 
SA. SB oes eee $ 68.00 per M 
4x12x12 in... 2 76.50 рег М 
6х12х12 іп... .. 105.00 рег М 
Е IN ee 170.00 рег М 


HOLLOW BUILDING TILE (f.o.b. job) 
саг!оа@ lots). 


И а EAT ENTRA $76.50 
аБаБ RT И 


Composifion Floors — 18c to 30c рег 
Sq. ft. In large quantities, 18c per 
Sq. ft. laid. 

Mosaic Floors—80c per за. ft. 

Dnraílex Floor—23c to 30c sq. ft. 

Rubber Tile—50c per sq. ft. 

Terazzo Floors—40c to 55c per Sq. ft. 

Terazzo Steps—$1.50 lin. ft. 

——— A 


Conerete Work (material at San Fran- 


cisco bunkers) — Quotations below 
2000 lbs. to the ton. 


No. 3 rock, at bunkers....... $1.65 per ton 
No. 4 rock, at bunkers..... 1.65 per ton 
Elliott top gravel, at bnkrs. 1.75 per ton 
Washed gravel, at bunkrs 1.75 per ton 
Eliott top gravel, at bnkrs. 1.75 per ton 
City gravel, at bunkers.... 1.40 per ton 
River sand, at bunkers...... 1.50 per ton 
Delivered bank sand........ 1.10 cu yd. 


Note—Above prices are subject to dis- 
count of 10c per ton on Invoices paid 
on or before the 15th of month, fol- 
lowing delivery. 

SAND 


Del Monte, $1.75 to $3.00 per ton. 
Fan Shell Beach (car lots, f. o. b. 


70 


Lake Majella), $2.75 to $4.00 per 
ton. 
Cement, $2.25 per bbl. in paper sks. 


Cement (f.o.b. Job, S. F.) $2.40 per 


bbl. 
Cement (f.o.b. Job, Oak.) $2.40 per 
per bb 
Rebate of 10 cents bbl. cash in 15 
days. 
Medusa "White" .......... $ 8.50 per bbl. 


Forms, Labors average 22.00 per M. 
Average cost of concrete in place, 

exclusive of forms, 27c per cu. ft. 
4-inch concrete basement 

MOOT eee 12%c to 13%c per sq. ft. 
4% inch Concrete Basement 

HOOT хх 13e to 14c per sq. ft. 
2-inch rat-proofing...615c per sq. ft. 
$1.10 per lin. ft. 


Dampproofing and Waterproofing— 
Two-coat work, 16с per yard. 
Membrane waterproofing—4 layers 

of saturated felt, $4.50 per square. 
Hot coating work, $1.80 per square. 
Medusa Waterproofing, 15%с per 

bbl, San Francisco Warehouse. 


Electric Wiring — $2.75 to $8.50 рег 
outlet for conduit work (including 
switches). 

Knob and tube average $2.25 to 


$5.00 per outlet, including 
switches. 
Elevators— 


Prices vary according to capacity, 
speed and type. Consult elevator 
companies. Average cost of in- 
stalling an automatic elevator in 
four-story building, $2450; direct 
automatic, about $2400. 


Excavation— 

Sand, 40 cents; clay or shale, 90c 
per yard. 

Teams, $10.00 per day. 

Trucks, $20 to $25 per day. 

Above figures are an average with- 
out water. Steam shovel work in 
large quantities, less; hard ma- 
terial, such as rock, will run con- 
siderably more. 


Fire Eseapes— 
Ten-foot balcony, with stairs, 
$65.00 per balcony. 


Glass (consult with manufacturers)— 

Double strength window glass, 15c 
per square foot. 

Quartz Lite, 50c per square foot. 
Plate 80c per square foot. 

Art, $1.00 up per square foot. 

pi ae skylights), 27с per square 
oot. 

Obscure glass, 25c square foot. 

Note—Add extra for setting. 


Heating— 
Average, $1.60 per sq. ft. of radia- 
tion, according to conditions. 


Iron—Cost of ornamental iron, cast 
iron, etc. depends on designs. 
Lumber (prices delivered to bldg. site) 
Common, $22.00 per M (average). 
Common O.P. select, average, $25.00. 

per M. 


1 x 6 No. 3—Form Lumber ...... $16.00 per M 
1 x 4 No. 1 flooring УС. 55.00 per M 
1x 4 No. 2 flooring . 46.00 per M 
e 4 No. 3 flooring 40.00 per M 
1 


x 6 No. 2 flooring $45.00 per M 
14х4 and 6 No. 2 flooring ........ 65.00 per M 


Slash grain— 


1х4 Ко. 2 flooring $35.00 per M 
1x4 No. 3 flooring .. 32.00 per M 
No. 1 common run to T. & G..... 28.00 per M 


Bath ы EE 4.15 рек М 
Shingles (add cartage to prices 
quoted)— 


-...$ .85 рег bdle. 
.65 per bdle. 
„85 per bdle. 


Redwood, No. 1 
Redwood, No. 2 naa 
Red Cedar ==: 


Hardwood Flooring (delivered to 
building)— 


18-16x314" T & G Maple 
1 1-16x214" T & С Мар! 


$100.00 M ft, 
121.00 M ft. 


75х814 sq. edge Maple .. .. 120.00 M ft. 
13-16х2М4” 3х2” 5-16х2” 
T&G T&G Sq.Ed. 


Clr. Qtd. Oak ....$175.00 М $125.00 М $168 M 
Sel. Qtd. Oak ... 115.00 M 95.00 М 110M 
Clr. Pla. Oak .. 110.00 M 87.00M 95M 


Sel. Pla. Oak .. 106.00 M 68.00 М 82M 
Clear Maple ....... 110.00 M 82.00М 
Laying & Finishing 14cft. 128. Шей. 


Wage—Floor layers, $9.00 per day. 


Building Paper— 


1 ply per 1000 ft. roll... 
2 ply per 1000 ft. roll 


3 ply per 1000 ft. roll 1 6.00 
Sisalkraft, 500 ft. топ... 6.00 
Sash cord com. No. 7. ...$1.00 per 100 ft, 


Sash cord com. No. 8 1.10 per 100 ft. 
Sash cord spot No. 7. 1.60 per 100 ft. 
Sash cord spot No. 8........... 1.90 per 100 ft, 
Sash weights cast iron, $46.00 ton 

Nails, $2.85 base. 

Belgian nails, $2.60 base. 


Millwork— 

O. P. $74.00 per 1000. R. W., $80.00 
per 1000 (delivered). 

Double hung box window frames, 
average, with trim, $5.00 and up. 
each. 

Doors, including trim (single panel, 
1% in. Oregon pine) $5.75 and up, 
each. 

Doors, including trim (five panel, 
134 in. Oregon plne) $5.50 each. 

Screen doors, $3.50 each. 

Patent screen windows, 20c a sq. ft. 
Cases for kitchen pantries seven ft. 
high, per lineal ft., $4.25 each. 
Dining room cases, $5.25 per lineal 

foot. 

Labor—Rough carpentry, warehouse 
heavy framing (average), $11.00 
per M. 

For smaller work, average, $22 to 
$30 per 1000. 


The Architect and Engincer, October, 1932 


Маг е— (See Dealers) 


Palnting— 


Two-coat work ................ 27с per yard 
Three-coat work . .36с per yard 
Cold Water Painting ...... 8с per yard 
Whitewashing .................. 4c per yard 
Turpentine, 70с per gal, in cans and 
S0c per gal. in drums. 
Raw Linseed Oil—62c gal. in bbls. 
Boiled Linseed Oil—65c gal. in bbls. 
Medusa Portland Cement Paint, 20c 
per ІР. 


Carter or Dutch Boy White Lead in 
Oll (in steel kegs). 


Per Lb. 

1 ton lots, 100 lbs. net weight 1034c 
500 1b. and less than 1 ton lots 11c 
Less than 500 Ib. lots.................. 11%с 


Datch Boy Dry Red Lead and 
Litharge (in steel kegs). 
1 ton lots, 100 1b. kegs, net wt. 1034c 
500 lb. and less than 1 ton lots 11c 
Less than 500 Ib. lots.................. 11%с 
Red Lead In ОП (in steel kegs) 
1 ton lots, 100 1b. keg s,net. wt, 1215c 
500 lb. and less than 1 ton lots 1215c 
Less than 500 Ib. 1065..................... 13c 
Note—Accessibility and conditions 
cause wide variance of costs. 


Patent Chimneys— 


6-inch.... $1.00 lineal foot 
EE анаа .. 1.50 lineal foot 
LDS bye ne 1.85 lineal foot 


12-inch 2.10 lineal foot 


Plastering—Interior— 


Yard 


1 coat, brown mortar only, wood lath...$0.36 
2 M lime mortar hard finish, wood 
ti 


.45 
.50 


3 coats, metal lath and plaster . 22500 
1.10 
65 

lath plastered ..... —— до 115 
Shingle partition 3 cha e .60 


Single partition % channel lath 2 sides 
2 inches thick А 
4-inch double p 
2 sides ..—..... 
4-inch double partitlon % 
2 sides plastered ...................................- 12:93 


Plastering—Exterior— 


Yard 
2 coata cement finish, brick or con- 
Әз уа ПЕАТ ЕЕЕ ЕЛЕНЕ -% .90 
2 coats Atlas cement, brick or con- 
cod ЗЕ К ы леги тесе КОСЕ .I5 


wire mesh .. 2.90 


Wood lath, $1. 


2.5-Ib. sin 
2.5-№ .20 
3.4-Ib. .22 
3.4-lb. 428 
34-inch hot roll channels, $72 


Finish plaster, $16.40 ton; in paper sacks, 
Dealer's commission, $1.00 off above 
quotations. 
$13.85 (rebate 10е sack). 
Lime, f.o.b. warehouse, $2,25bbl. ; cars, $2.15 
Lime, bulk (ton 2000 Ibs.), $16.00 ton. 
Wall Board 5 ply, $43.00 per M. 
Hydrate Lime, $19.50 ton. 


Composition Stucco—$1.35 to $1.75 per 
sq. yard (applied). 


Plumbing— 


From $55.00 per fixture up, accord- 
ing to grade, quantity and runs. 


Roofing— 


"Standard" tar and gravel, $5.00 per 
square for 30 squares or over. 
Less than 30 squares, $5.25 per за. 

Tile, $17.00 to $30.00 per square. 

Redwood Shingles, $11.00 per square 
in place. 

Cedar Shingles, $10 sq. in place. 

Recoat, with Gravel, $3.00 per sq. 


1932 Wage Schedule for San Francisco Building Trades 


Established by Builders’ Exchange and Endorsed by Various Crafts 


Craft Wage Per Day 

Asbestas workers ........ 
Bricklayers .......... . 8.80 
Bricklayers’ hadcarriers 3.60 
Cabinet workers (outside) 7.20 
Caisson workers (open) 6.40 
Carpenters ............... 1.20 
Cement finishers 7.20 
Cork insnlation workers 7.20 
Electric workers .......... . 7.20 
Electric fixtnre hangers 6.40 
Elevator constructors . 8.00 
О a - 5.60 
Engineers, portable and haisting 7.20 
Glass workers .............. . 6.80 
Hardwood flaormen . 7.20 
Hunsemovers ... 6.40 
Housesmiths, аг i = 1.20 


Hausesmiths, reinfarced concrete or 
TUL ETN © Tle есле trust 7.20 


Iren workers (bridge and structural) т- 

clading engineers . 
Laborers, building 
Laborers, соттоп ... 
Lathers, channel iran 
Lathers, all others 
Marble setters 


Helpers ...... 5.00 
Millwrights ... 7.20 
Model makers 8.00 
Madel casters .... 7.20 
Mosaic and terazzo workers ... 7.20 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


Craft Wage Per Day 

Helpera . 9.00 

Painters .. . 1.00 
Painters, varnishers and polishers (out- 

side) . 7.00 

Piledrivera and wharf builders . 7.20 

Piledrivers, engineers . . 8.00 


Plasterers . 8.80 
Plasterers’ hodearriers . 6.00 
Plumbers ................... . 8.00 


Roofers, composition . 6.40 


Roofers, all others ... . 6.10 
Sheet metal workers 7.20 
Sprinkler fitters ... . 8.80 
Steam fittera ... . 8.00 
Stair builders . . 7.20 
Steel pan, concrete . . 5.60 
Stane cutters, soft and granite . 6.80 
Stone setters, sofl and granite . 7.20 
Stone derrickmen ... . 7.20 
Tile setters ... . 8.00 
Helpers .... . 5.00 
Tile, cork and rubber -= 1-20! 
Auto truck drivers, less than 2500 pounds 5.50 
do, 2500 Ibs, ta 4500 Ibs. . ... 6.00 
do, 4500 Ibs. to 6500 lbs . 6.50 
Чп, 6500 Ibs. and over . . 7.00 
General teamsters, 1 horse . . 9.90 
do, 2 horses ... . 6.00 
do, 4 harses .. . 6.50 
Plow teamsters, 4 horses . . 6.50 
Scraper teamsiers, 2 harses . 6.00 
do, 4 horses .................... . 6.00 


Sheet Metal— 


Windows—Metal, $1.80 a sq. foot. 
Fire doors (average), including 
hardware, $2.00 per sq. ft. 


Skyilghts— 


Copper, $1.00 sq. ft. (not glazed). 
Galvanized iron, 25с sq. ft. (not 
glazed). 


Steel—Structural 


$80 ton (erected), this quotation is 
an average for comparatively 
small quantities. Light truss 
work higher. Plain beams and 
column work in large quantities 

$73 to $78 per ton cost of steel; 

average building, $77.00. 

Steel Reintorcing— 
$68.00 per tou, set, (average). 


Stone— 
Granite, average, $6.50 cu. foot In 
place. 
Sandstone, average Blue, $33.50; 


Boise, $2.60 sq. ft. in place. 
Indiana Limestone, $2.60 per sq. ft. 
in place. 


Store Fronts— 


Copper sash bars for store fronts, 
corner, center and around sides, 
will average 70c per lineal foot. 


Note—Consult with agents. 


Tile — Floor, Wainscot, Ete. — (See 
Dealers). 


GENERAL WORKING CONDITIONS— 


1. Eight hours shall constitute a day's work 
for all crafts, except as otherwise noted. 

2. Plasterers’ Hodcarriers, Bricklayers’ Hodcar- 
tiers, Roofers’ Laborers and Engineers, Portable 
and Hoisting, shall start 15 minutes before other 
workmen, both at morning and at noon. 

3. Five days, consisting of not more than 
eight hours a day, on Monday to Friday inclu- 
sive, shall constitute a week's work. 

4. The wages set forth herein shall be con- 
sidered as net wages. 

5. Transportation costs іп excess of twenty-five 
cents each way shall be paid by tbe contractor. 

6. Traveling time in excess of one and one-half 
hours each way shall be paid for at straight 
time rates. 

7. Overtime shall be paid as follows: For the 
first four hours after the first eigbt hours, time 
and one-balf. All time thereafter sball be paid 
double time. Saturdays {except Laborers), Sun- 
days and Holidays from 12 midnight of the pre- 
zeding day, shall be paid double time. 

8. On Saturday Laborers shall be paid straight 
time for an eight-hour day. 

9. Where two shifts are worked in any twenly- 
four hours, shift time shall be straight lime. 
Where three shifts are worked, eight hours’ pay 
shall be paid for seven hours on the second and 
third shifts. 

10. All work, except as noted in paragrapb 11, 
shall be performed between the hours of 8 а. m. 
and 5 p. m. : > 

11. In emergencies, where premises cannot be 
vacated until the close of business, mea theo 
reporting for work shall work at straight time. 
Any work performed on such jobs after midnight 
shall be paid time and one-half up 10 four bours 
of overtime and double time thereafter, provided, 
that if a new crew is employed on Saturdays, 
Sundays or Holidays which has not worked dur- 
ing the five preceding working days, such crew 
shall be paid time and one-half. No job can be 
considered as an emergency job until it has been 
registered with the Industrial Association and a 
determination has been made that the job falls 
within the terms of this section. 

12. Recognized holidays to be: New Year's 
Day, Decoration Day, Fourth of July, Labor 
Day, Admission Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christ- 
mas Day. 

13. Men ordered to report for work, for whom 
no employment is provided, shall be entitled ta 
two hours’ pay. 


71 


BETTER HOMES COMPETITION 

The program for Better Homes in America 
Small House Competition for 1932 is out and 
awards will be made and announced soon after 
January 1, 1933. The following are the conditions 
governing the entries: 

The competition closes December 1, 1932. 

The awards are to be made to practicing archi- 
tects for the best design submitted for each of 
three types of houses—three medals in all: 


(a) One story house. 
Storage space but no living accommoda- 
tions may occur in roof space. 

(b) Story-and-a-half house. 
Living accommodations partly in a second 
story which is actually a “half story." 

(c) Two story house. 


The awards are aimed to discover and call at- 
tention to the best small houses actually con- 
structed during the given period, and thus to stim- 
ulate interest in overcoming the faulty design and 
construction of the really small house. To this end 
the actual cube of the house, above the level of 
the first floor, shall not be greater than 24,000 cu. 
ft. except for two story houses for which a cubage 
of 26.000 cu. ft. is permitted. Open porches esti- 
mated at 14 cube. 


Documents to be submitted include floor plans, 
blueprints or otherwise, showing first floor, and 
second floor if it has living accommodations. Two 
elevations. One or two photographs of exterior, 
preferably two. Two photographs (but not more 
than two) of interior may be submitted if desired; 
but the award is to be based upon the design of 
the structure, not on its furnishings; therefore, 
interior photographs, if submitted, should be se- 
lected with this in mind. 

This award is intended as an annual award. 
Houses entered in the 1932 competition shall be 
those the construction of which was finally com- 
pleted between the years 1927 and 1931 inclusive. 
Designs of houses which have been submitted in 
any given year cannot be resubmitted to the com- 
mittee in later years. 


Exhibits shall be shipped addressed to Better 
Homes in America, c/o the American Institute of 
Architects, 1741 New York Ave., Washington, 
D. C., so as to be received not later than Decem- 
ber 1, 1932. They will be handled as carefully as 
possible but must be sent at the risk of the sender. 
If any value is placed upon them by the sender 
he should take such steps as he sees fit to insure 
against their loss. 

Better Homes in America shall have the right 
to publish illustrations of designs awarded medals, 


and such other designs submitted as may be 
deemed desirable. 


[Concluded on Page 74, Col. 2] 
72 


American Bnstitute of Architects 
(Organized 1857) 


Northern California Chapter 


Jonn J. Donovan 
Raymond W. JEANS 
Jas. H. MITCHELL 


PRESIDENT . : 
VicE-PRESIDENT . 
SECRETARY-TREASURER 

DIRECTORS 
Henry Н. Gurrerson ВоглмоІ. Ѕтамснлм С.Е. ASHLEY 
Frep'k H. Meyer Geo. R. Кимкнлвот Birce M. CLARK 


Southern California Chapter, Los Angeles 


PRESIDENT Gorpon B. KAUFMANN 
VICE-PRESIDENT SuMNER M. SPAULDING 
SECRETARY Я PALMER SABIN 
TREASURER PauL J. DUNCAN 


DIRECTORS 
CanLETON M. Winstow Wm. RicHarps RoLanp Е. COATE 
EUGENE WESTON, JR. 


Santa Barbara Chapter 


PRESIDENT RusseL Ray 
VICE-PRESIDENT HaroLD BURKET 
SECRETARY E. Катн LOCKARD 
TREASURER Leonarp A. COOKE 
Oregon Шы Portland 
PRESIDENT . Накош W. Dorv 
VICE-PRESIDENT FRED AANDAHL 
SECRETARY . М.Н. CROWELL 
TREASURER Harry А. HERZOG 


TRUSTEES 


C.H. \/лымовк JAMIESON Равквв, WILLIAM HoLrForp 


Washington State Chapter, Seattle 


PRESIDENT c J. Газтев Homes 
First VicE- PRESIDENT. R. F. McCLELLAND 
SECOND VicE-PRESIDENT . . Ernest T. Моск 
THIRD VicE-PRESIDENT Harry C. WELLER 
SECRETARY Lance E. Gowen 
TREASURER 20. . a. Дівевт M. ALLEN 
EXECUTIVE BOARD 
Автнив L. LovELEss CLYDE GRAINGER ARTHUR P. HERRMAN 


San Diego Chapter 


PRESIDENT Louis J. Сш 

VICE-PRESIDENT Уилиам P. LODGE 

SECRETARY Снавгвв Н. Mirrs 

TREASURER Be us Ray ALDERSON 
DIRECTORS 

Louis J. Сил. HAMMOND W. WHITSITT 


Aan Francigeo Architectural Club 


130 Kearny Street 


PRESIDENT С. JEFFERSON SLY 
VicE-PRESIDENT DonnELL E. JAEKLE 
SECRETARY D. E. ВвікоЕні. 
TREASURER STERLING CARTER 


DIRECTORS 


F. A. REYNAUD S. C. LEONHAUSER 


В. Мовгім 


3108 d uM Club 


PRESIDENT SuMNER SPAULDING 
Vice-PRESIDENTS: 

FitcH HaskELL, RALPH FLEWELLING, Luis Payo 
TREASURER KEMPER NoMLAND 
SECRETARY seen Rene Mussa 

DIRECTORS 
TYLER McWHORTER J. E. STANTON Вовт. Lockwoop 
MANAGER, GEORGE Р. HALES 


The Architect and Engincer, Octobcr, 1932 


Washington ш Е of Architects 


PRESIDENT = 
FIRST VicE-PRESIDENT 
SECOND VICE-PRESIDENT 


]онм S. Ниозом 
Jurus А. ZirrLE 
STANLEY А. SMITH 


Tuirp VICE-PRESIDENT R. M. THORNE 

FOURTH VICE-PRESIDENT R. C. STANLEY 

SECRETARY . L. F. HAUSER 

TREASURER H. G. HAMMOND 
‘TRUSTEES 

Е. GLEN MORGAN О. Е. NELSON 

Н.Н. James WM. J. Jones 


&otietp of ei County Architects 


PRESIDENT WiLLIAM E. SCHIRMER 

VicE-PRESIDENT MORTON WILLIAMS 

SECRETARY-TREASURER W. R. YELLAND 
DIRECTORS 

W. G. CORLETT J. J. Donovan 

W.R. YELLAND Jas. T. NARBETT 


Long ыш ч Club 


PRESIDENT Нисн В. Davies 
VICE-PRESIDENT : СЕси. SCHILLING 
SECRETARY AND TREASURER ]0$ЕРн Н. Вовевте 


т чыш € [ub 


PRESIDENT Epwarp Mussa 
VICE-PRESIDENT RicHARD W. WARF 
SECRETARY Roy PARKE: 
TREASURER ArTHUR E. Fisk 


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 
Mark W. ErLswortH Epwin L. WESTBERG OnniN F. STONF 


State Association California Architects 


PRESIDENT . ALBERT J. Evers. San Francisco 
VICE-PRESIDENT RosERT Н. Orr, Los Angeles 
SECRETARY А. М. EpELMAN, Los Angeles 
TREASURER W. I. Garren, San Francisco 


EXECUTIVE BOARD (NORTHERN SECTION) 


ALBERT ]. EVERS H. C. ALLEN CHESTER Н. MILLER 
W. I. GARREN 
(SOUTHERN SEcTION) 
Rosert H. Orr Louis J. Сил. А. М. EDELMAN 


Hanorpb Burkett 


Directors ( NORTHERN SECTION) 


Henry Сотллм$, Palo Alto; Ernesr Norserc. San Mateo. 
Henry Н. Ситтевѕом, San Francisco; L. С. Perry, Vallejo. 


Directors (SouTHERN SECTION) 
В. D. Kinc, Santa Monica; Evererr Parks, Anaheim; 
J. A. Murray, Hollywood; Неввевт J. Mann, San Diego. 


San Diego and Imperial County Society 


State Association of California Architects 
537 Spreckels Theater Building, 
San Diego, Calif. 


PRESIDENT Неввевт J. MANN 
VICE-PRESIDENT Ешсеме HOFFMAN 
SECRETARY- TREASURER Rosert R. Curtis 


Executive Boarp 
Неввевт J. MANN Eucene Новнмам Rosert В. Curtis 
Louis J. Сил, WirLiAM P. Lopce 
Ways AND MEANS COMMITTEE 
Ковевт HALLEY, JR. Frank L. Horer, Jr. 
Hammonp W. WHITSITT 


The Architect and Engineer, Octobcr, 1932 


American Society Landscape Architects 
Pacific Coast Chapter 


PRESIDENT . . L. DEMING TILTON 
VICE-PRESIDENT р 5 Cunas. H. Diccs 
SECRETARY . . Miss KATHERINE BASHFORD 
"TREASURER ВиззЕгт. L. McKeon 


MEMBERS EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 


М/твив Davin Соок GEORGE GIBBS 


Architects League of Hollywood 


6520 Sunset Boulevard 
Hollywood, California 


PRESIDENT L. G. SCHERER 
VICE-PRESIDENT . . VERNER McCLunc 
SECRETARY- TREASURER J. A. Murrey 


DIRECTORS 


Влерн FLEwELLING, М. L. BARKER, James Т. HANDLEY, 
Бомлір F. SHUGART AND JOHN ROTH 


Architectural Examiners 


Northern District 


Burke Building, 450 McAllister Street 

San Francisco, California 
PRESIDENT . 
SECRETARY 


. ALBERT J. EVERS 
Henry Н. GuTTERSON 
MEMBERS 


WARREN С. PERRY FREDERICK H. MEYER C. J. RYLAND 


Southern District 


State Building, Los Angeles 
ӨТІ. . Jonn C. Austin 
А. М. EDELMAN 


PRESIDENT . 
SECRETARY AND TuS uS 


MEMBERS 


JOHN PARKINSON Louis J. Gir H. C. CHAMBERS 


State Board of Engineer Examiners 


PRESIDENT H. J. Brunnier, San Francisco 
VICE-PRESIDENT ee Henry D. Ову. 
SECRETARY Елірн J. ВЕЕР, Los Angeles 


Structural Engineers Association 


of Northern California 


PRESIDENT L. Н. NISHKIAN 
VICE-PRESIDENT WALTER HUBER 
SECRETARY- TREASURER А. B. SAPH. JR. 


Boarn ов DIRECTORS 


А. B. ЗАРН, JR. SipNEY GORMAN 
Hanorp В. HAMMILL 


WALTER HUBER 
E. L. Core 


73 


FIVE BILLION FOR REPAIRS 
Frederick M. Feiker, Director of the Bureau of 
Foreign and Domestic Commerce, promises the 
full cooperation of the National Committee on Re- 
conditioning, Remodeling, and Modernizing in a 
nation-wide campaign to accomplish that purpose. 

Mr. Feiker is chairman of this committee. 


It is to accelerate this movement that the Na- 
tional Committee оп Reconditioning, Remodeling, 
and Modernizing is only too anxious to cooperate 
with every community interested in promoting re- 
pairs and improvements of commercial, home, and 
industria] structures for the purpose of energizing 
industry and relieving unemployment," he stated. 


Мг. Feiker pointed out that in the neighborhood 
of five billion dollars worth of repairs are needed 
to keep existing structures in good condition. "Of 
this amount alone," he declared, "approximately 
three and a half bilion would constitute wages 
for local workers. That means real aid for employ- 
ment—plus bargain prices for the people who have 
the work done," he said. 


The continual rise in standards for the modern 
home and commercial building calls for the expen- 
diture of many more billions to bring them up to 
date. As an indication of how much can be done 
for little expense today, Mr. Feiker stated that 
the average repair job can be done for at least 
20 per cent less than at any time in the last ten 
years. 

In describing the purposes and functions of the 
National Committee, Chairman Feiker said: 


“The purpose of the National Committee on 
Reconditioning, Remodeling, and Modernization 
is to accelerate the demand for men and materials 
by stimulating repair and improvement of com- 
mercial, residential, and industrial structures. It 
is concerned with the welfare of the men and 
women who live in buildings, work in buildings, 
repair buildings, invest in buildings, and produce 
the materials for buildings. 


"One road to more buying and employment is 
through the construction industry. One person in 
every ten lives by it. Of every dollar spent for 
repair, maintenance, and improvement, 70 cents 
goes to labor, turning each new worker into a 
customer for other goods and services. Revival of 
the small construction industry has always led to 
general up turn in business and employment. 


“Wear and tear, fires and tornadoes annually 
create a need for five billion dollars worth of re- 
pairs and reconditioning. For approximately two 
years much of this has been put off. 

"Meanwhile, standards for the modern commer- 
cial building and home have continued to rise. 


Billions of dollars must be spent to bring them 
up to date. 


74 


"From the building owner's point of view, there 
is no time so advantageous to modernize as dur- 
ing a business depression. Material prices are low 
and skilled workmen are available. This oppor- 
tunity, however, is not one which leads owners to 
act automatically. While many have repaired and 
modernized, many others have not done so. 


“The tendency during depression is to limit 
repairs and postpone improvement. It is against 
this tendency that a campaign of information, 
counsel, and constructive organization is directed. 
А high degree of promotional effort is necessary. 

“The idea has found acceptance in more than 
200 communities as an instrument for improving 
business and employment. Within the last 30 
days, 35 communities have sought the aid of the 
committee. 


"By helping communities to regiment the own- 
ers of homes and commercial and industrial struc- 
tures, the building trades, the building material 
dealers, and the public services in concerted pro- 
grams, the National Committee on Recondition- 
ing, Remodeling, and Modernization seeks to en- 
ergize the demand for workers and materials.” 


BETTER HOMES COMPETITION 
[Concluded from Page 72] 
grant honorable mention to designs which are 
deemed worthy. 

In awarding honorable mention the jury will 
give specia] consideration to the suitability of the 
designs to the climatic conditions and local tradi- 
tions of the geographical regions in which they 
were built. 

Prize winning designs will be published, and 
designs winning honorable mention will also be 
published at the discretion of Better Homes in 
America. Any publication of the designs which 
are awarded medals or honorable mention will be 
copyrighted and due prominence will be given to 
the name and address of the designer, with the 
statement that the design is his private property. 


STORE BUILDING 
William E. Milwain, architect of Oakland, has 
completed plans for a one story brick store build- 
ing at Walnut Creek for Louis De Martini. The 
Hagstrom Food Stores are the lessees. 


ENGINEERS’ EXAMINATION 
The State Board of Registration for Civil En- 
gineers will hold examinations at Los Angeles 
October 13, 14 and 15 and in San Francisco Oc- 
tober 20, 21 and 22 for registration of civil and 
structural engineers. 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


MONEL METAL ххх ль 


is the accepted material for soda fountains and lunch-room equipment, just as it 


is the universal metal for food service equipment in leading hotels and restau- 


rants throughout the country. 


CORROSIRON [Acid Resisting Iron] 


is the accepted material for draining waste lines. CORROSIRON meets all 
State and Municipal specifications for drain lines from school laboratories and 


chemistry rooms. 


Pacific Foundry Company Ltd. 
Pacific Metals Company Ltd. 


470 East Third St. 3100 Nineteenth St. 551 Fifth Ave. 
LOS ANGELES SAN FRANCISCO NEW YORK 


Haws Manhattan Drinking Fountain 


SALUTARY FEATURES 


. Bubbler orifice above rim of bowl protects fresh 
water supply in case bowl should flood. 


. Anti-Squirt orifice guard. 
. Orifice protecting shield. 


. Vitreous China Receptor proportioned to pre- 
vent unnecessary splashing and designed free 
from corners difficult to clean. Bowl furnished 
in 9 colors. 


. Octagonal waste strainer permits efficient drain- 
age of water. 


. Self-closing Automatic Stream Control Valve. 
Working parts on regulator can be repaired 
without removing valve from fountain. 


. Cast Brass 114” trap with cleanout plug. 
. 2%” Loose Key Stop. 


HAWS SANITARY DRINKING FAUCET СО. 


1808 HARMON STREET BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 aS 


CONTRACTORS RENEW LICENSES 
By Cor. C. W. HuNTINGTON 

With the nation-wide upswing in business con- 
ditions now an established fact, it is, indeed, 
pleasing to report that an improvement is apparent 
in business of all of the professions and trades 
represented within the California State Depart- 
ment of Professional and Vocational Standards. 

Public confidence having again been restored, 
the department is exerting every possible means 
to prevent operations of unscrupulous, unethical 
or unlicensed operatives in any of the trades or 
professions from again shattering confidence. 

The adjustment of conditions toward a perma- 
nent return to normalcy, however, has not been 
without adding some new problems to the work 
of the various boards which comprise the depart- 
ment. 

Cases have bcen brought to our attention where 
the end of the depression has been a signal for 
the unscrupulous or unethical person to again re- 
sume his nefarious operations. Precautionary 
measures are being taken to guard against this 
condition, however. 

Licenses of the various boards, which expired 
at the close of the last fiscal year, are being re- 
newed at a highly satisfactory rate. In the case 
of the Contractors’ Division, І am happy to report 
that out of 25,000 licentiates operating at the close 
of the last fiscal year, approximately 20,000 or 80 
per cent have obtained their 1932-33 licenses. 

Although only two months of the current fiscal 
year have elapsed, preliminary work on budgets 
of the various boards for the new biennium—ex- 
tending from July 1, 1933, to June 30, 1935—is 
now under way, and these will soon be submitted 
to the director of finance for his approval and in- 
clusion in the biennial budget which is to be sub- 
mitted to the Legislature in January. 

Anticipating what one’s revenue may be and 
preparing a schedule of what expenditures may 
be necessary almost three years hence, is far from 
what may be termed a simple problem. The reces- 
sion during the past three years, together with 
the present change in conditions toward a return 
to normalcy makes it exceedingly difficult to an- 
ticipate what conditions will be in the last half of 
the next biennium—or two and a half years hence. 

However, economy is the watchword of the 
various boards and their disbursing officers in 
preparing the new budgets. 

With the 1933 session of the Legislature fast 
approaching, considerable attention is being given 
by various board members to proposed changes in 
the laws governing the respective boards, which 
will probably be recommended to the august law- 
makers next January. 

Several conferences on this subject have already 
been held by the various boards with your director. 


76 


In the Bureau of Contractors’ Registration, of 
which I am happy to be the head, we are also 
closely scanning recommendations submitted for 
legislative changes, with a view of strengthening 
the work of the bureau to the end that greater 
protection may be rendered the industry and the 
public. 

That the greatest possible service be rendered 
the public and the professions or trades repre- 
sented in the department, continues to be our chief 
objective. To that end, a total of 5,661 investiga- 
tions were conducted by the various boards dur- 
ing the past month. These investigations resulted 
in many proceedings before your Registrar of 
Contractors or the various boards, and in turn 
resulted in the revocation or suspension of the 
licenses of many persons, where evidence of 
fraudulent or unethical operations were disclosed 
or evidence of infraction of the laws were intro- 
duced. 

I turn now to the operations of the various 
units of the department, and will briefly sum- 
marize their operations. І will first discuss the 
Bureau of Contractors’ Registration. 

This bureau, which I am happy to head, has 
been exceedingly active during the past month, 
with a total of 223 complaints pending before the 
registrar, of which 45 were filed during the month 
—or at the rate of one every 18 hours. 

These cases involved a total of $351,000 in new 
construction or alteration projects. Hence, the 
bureau, acting in a quasi-judicial capacity, has 
been able to expedite action or effect a satisfactory 
solution and settlement of the various complaints, 
and thus tended to prevent this number of cases 
from adding to the congestion of court calendars 
with its consequent delays due to legal tech- 
nicalities. 

Hearings were held in 37 cases, involving a 
total of 46 hearings for the month. While it was 
not found necessary to revoke any licenses, five 
licenses were suspended and 19 cases were dis- 
missed with the accused contractor being severely 
warned to guard against future conduct of a ques- 
tionable nature. In some cases, the names of these 
offending contractors were “flagged” and their 
past record will be under scrutiny in the event that 
other complaints are filed against them. A total 
of 13 cases were settled by arbitration, while 34 
other cases were settled without formal charges 
being lodged against the erring contractor. 

Court proceedings were invoked in five cases, 
while two other cases were still pending before 
the judiciary, with three convictions being ob- 
tained. 

Operations of the Board of Registration for 
Civil Engineers were marked by a series of ex- 
aminations conducted for applicants for licenses 
as either civil engineer or structural engineer. [п 


The Architect and Engincer, October, 1932 


addition, the board adopted new rules governing 
the regulation and licensing of the structural engi- 
neer. Three investigations were conducted and 10 
licenses granted. 

'The board also designated H. ]. Brunnier as 
its representative at the National Council of State 
Boards of Engineering Examiners, which met in 
New York City September 29. In addition, the 
board amended its rules to provide for the election 
of a president and other officers at the first meeting 
in January each year. 

'The Boards of Architectural Examiners (north- 
ern and southern districts) conducted 40 investi- 
gations and instituted court proceedings in several 
cases. 

The Southern Board is conducting an investi- 
gation to determine upon any changes in its rules 
of procedure which might operate for the benefit 
of the profession and expedite action by the board 
in its various cases. Through cooperation of the 
Southern California Telephone Company, the 
board succeeded in having the names of alleged 
violators of the architectural codes deleted from 
the new directory, which is now on the press. 


TACOMA DRAFTSMEN'S CLUB 
The following officers have been elected by the 
Tacoma Draftsmen’s Club: President, Ralph 


* 


BETHLEHEM 
WIDE-FLANGE 


STRUCTURAL SHAPES 2-2 


ч , 


Subsidiary of 
Bethlehem Steel Corporation 


Che Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


CORPORATION 


== 
инн 
STEEL 
Paridi 
District Offices: Seattle, Portland, Los Angeles, Honolulu, 
Export Distributor: Bethlehem Steel Export Corporation. New York 


Bishop of the office of Sutton, Whitney and 
Dugan, and Secretary-Treasurer, John Richards 
from the office of Heath, Gove and Bell. Meet- 
ings are held in the office of Heath, Gove and 
Bell twice a week. 

The object of the Club is the development of 
the draftsman and the profession of architecture 
through study and companionship. The method 
of study is divided into (a) Design and (b) Rela- 
tive Technical Subjects. 

Edward Young, of the office of Roland E. Bor- 
hek, is chairman of the design section of the club. 
The members take design problems similar in 
character to those of the Beaux Arts Institute of 
Design. The current problem is a "Restaurant 
on a River." Meetings are held every Wednesday 
to discuss the current problems and transact other 
business. 


FREE PUBLIC INSTRUCTION 


Evening classes giving free instruction in sub- 
jects of interest to all in construction, are given 
at the technical department of the Humboldt even- 
ing high school, 22nd and Bartlett Streets, between 
Mission and Valencia, San Francisco. Classes are 
now forming in Building Trade Drafting and In- 
dustrial Mathematics. 


General Offices: 
SAN FRANCISCO 


77 


“Remarkable Permanence 
a color and Luei 


Brown €? Brown, Architects, of Washington, 
D. С, write us of their test with Cabot's Green Gloss 
Collopakes: “The paint was used on an old cellar door 
receiving the full wash of rain, and rays of the sun. A 
comparison with a protected control sample shows re- 
markable permanence of color and lustre." 

Other architects say: "Still glossy, true green and 
unimpaired." . "My experience would indicate no 
better outside paint." . . . "As fresh and glossy as day 
applied." . "A decided difference in favor of your 
ponte he best green Ihave @уег used и а 
“Its holding up 100%.” “I never saw anything 
else stand up on a concrete floor." (Names on request.) 

Cabot's Gloss Collopakes are made without fillers 
and are therefore non-fading. They have much more 
covering power than ordinary paint and they retain 
their gloss out-of-doors. Made in all colors, but particu- 
larly famous in permanent greens for doors, shutters and 
trim. Mail the coupon below for more complete infor- 
mation. 


Хеш Englond Telephone and Telegraph Exchange Building, Greenfield, Mass. 

Architects, Densmore, LeClear & Robbins. Shutters and outside wood trim 

finished with Cabot's Glass Collopakes in special color selected by the orchitects, 
Made by the Mokers о) Cabot's Creosote Shingle and Wood Stains. 


Cabot’s 


Gloss Collopakes 


> HL о ру р hf р ff и 


Mal bekt- 141 Milk St., Boston. 


Please send me your “Green Book” together with 
Collopake color card. 


MENG 2. 


Address 


78 


LICENSE LAW AIDS CONTRACTORS 
L. F. Оамвовтн in the California Plasterer 


The question is frequently asked, "What bene- 
fit is the State Contractors’ License Law to the 
general contractor?" That the law has proved а 
benefit to the sub-contractor and owner is an ad- 
mitted fact. 


Owners have been mostly benefited because the 
law requires the fulfillment of specifications. In 
hundreds of cases brought to our department, gen- 
eral contractors and sub-contractors have been 
required to make good on some violation of the 
specifications. The contractor may no longer aban- 
don the contract without legal excuse; neither 
may he divert funds paid him for the prosecution 
or completion of a specific contract, or for a speci- 
fied purpose in the prosecution or completion of 
any contract, and he may not depart from or dis- 
regard plans or specifications, without the consent 
of the owner. He may not violate the building code 
of the State or any political subdivision thereof; 
neither may he do any willful or fraudulent act 
as a contractor in consequence of which another 
is subsequently injured. 

Since the adoption of this law, the owner for 
the first time has official protection. If he deals 
only with licensed contractors and uses ordinary 
precaution in having good plans and good speci- 
fications, he may expect to have a good job. So, 
too, the sub-contractor is reasonably protected 
from the diversion of funds by the general con- 
tractor. His chances of being defrauded have 
been reduced to a minimum, since the adoption 
of the Contractors’ Law. 


It is the general contractor who asks the ques- 
tion, "What is in this law for me?" It is the pur- 
pose of this article to answer in so far as space 
will permit, this very pertinent question. 


To the well informed general contractor, this 
question is purely academic. For none knows bet- 
ter than he, that the law was enacted for the pur- 
pose of restraining the irresponsible, dishonest 
contractor. He knows that this class of competi- 
tion can be compelled to abide by specifications, 
pay his sub-contractors and his material bills only 
through the operation of a just and justly ad- 
ministered law. If this object alone is attained, the 
law has accomplished its principal purpose. This, 
however, is by no means all the good that the 
general contractors derive from the law. To get 
the services of responsible sub-contractors who are 
willing and able to do their work to the satisfac- 
tion of the architects and owners, has been one 
of the chief annoyances of the general contractor, 
and right here comes the greatest benefit of all to 
him, if he will but make full use of the Contrac- 
tors Law. No longer may the sub-contractor 
abandon a contract without legal excuse, no longer 


Thc Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


may he get by with a slipshod job in violation of 
the specifications; no longer may he leave unpaid 
labor or material bills for the general contractor 
or owner to pay, and still hope to continue in 
business. It has taken a great many suspensions or 
revocations of licenses to prove this. Slowly, but 
surely, however, the fact is coming home to every 
branch of the building industry that the California 
State Contractors’ Law requires a higher ethical 
standard, and that the officers in charge of the 
department are determined to enforce all the pro- 
visions of the law. 


Owners have learned that they may appeal to 
the Registrar when they are unfairly treated. Con- 
tractors, too, are using this department for settling 
disputes among themselves. They know they can 
get justice from the Registrar of Contractors, 
without cost. Since the law went into effect August 
14, 1929, more than 1000 formal cases have been 
heard and adjusted in the Los Angeles office 
alone, while many times that number of informal 
cases have been adjusted, saving the parties to 
the complaints thousands of dollars in costly liti- 


THE СОТ ЕК 
MAIL CHUTE 


TO INSURE standard, depend- 
able equipment installed prompt- 
ly at moderate cost, the Cutler 
Mail Chute should be specified 
by name. If desired, approxi- 
mate estimates will be furnished 
in advance. 


If preferred, a stated sum may 
be allowed to cover this item. 


Full information on request. 


PRICE BUILDING SPECIALTIES, 

San Francisco, California 
CONTINENTAL BUILDING SPECIALTIES, Inc. 
Los Angeles, California 

D. E. FRYER & COMPANY, C. W. BOOST, 
Seattle, Washington Portland, Oregon 
FRYER-FORD COMPANY, 


gation. Spokane, Washington 
Today the law is being observed by most con- CUTLER MAIL CHUTE CO. 
tractors throughout the State; occasionally one is General Offices and Factory 


found operating without a license; in the Los ROCHESTER, NEW YORK 
Angeles office there have been twenty arrested 


and convicted for violating the law this year. It is 
to be hoped that these convictions will deter others 
from attempting to evade the law. Be that as it 
may, the law will be enforced and the offender 
is sure to be apprehended in the end. 

Many of those arrested and convicted are the 
very type of contractors that this law was enacted 
to suppress. Their sole aim was to fleece the public 
whenever opportunity permitted. In some cases 
they were caught only after the unfortunate 
owner had been made to suffer a severe loss. 
Slowly but surely the Contractors’ Law is closing 
in on these men who have been a disgrace to the 
contracting business. With a continued vigorous 
enforcement of the law, it will be but a short time 
until decency and fair dealing will be the rule 
among the contractors of California. 

It was the purpose of the framers of the State 
Contractors’ Law, to raise all branches of the 
contracting business to a higher, cleaner, and more 
ethical plane. Those who are administering the 
law tell us that beyond question, the law is ac- 
complishing this purpose. Before, however, it can AYA 
do all that the proponents hoped for, some few 
amendments will be necessary, and above all a R. N. NASON & CO. 
State building code should be adopted. 151 Potrero Avenue 
San Francisco 


Lacquer finishes are beautiful. 


Lacquer finishes are durable. 

Lacquer finishes are non-porous. 

Lacquer finishes are easy to clean. 

Lacquer finishes are time saving. 

Lacquer finishes аге being used more and 
more by the most up-to-date arcnitects. 


ava 


We will gladly send you suggested schedules 
for finishing. 


Most of our municipalities have building codes 
that afford owners (and honest contractors) рго- 
tection, but with the exception of the electrical 


The Architect and Enginecr, October, 1932 79 


ВН GRACE 
Ее 


Building Contractors 
and Managers of 
Construction 
CLAUS 
SPRECKELS BUILDING 
San Francisco 
Telephone 
GA nrIELD 7742 


ae к 
а- 5 


— 
ыл 
4 «са 


: х4.7, 
E 
oot «chin. 


та wet 


ca 


22. --....... 


Another улуы & Swinerton, Inc. 
Contract Completed 


22 STORY MILLS TOWER, SAN FRANCISCO 
Lewis P. HOBART, Architect 


Under construction—Opera House and Veterans’ Memorial 
Son Francisco Civic Center 


80 


work, anything goes in the county districts. Un- 
scrupulous contractors have been putting up homes 
on filled ground with the result that foundations 
have given away within a year; further, no regard 
has been shown by them for decent framing or 
plumbing sanitation. When you realize that in 
the Los Angeles district a great deal of the 
territory "is County”, that houses may be erected 
in this territory without benefit of inspection, 
that there is no law to hold the dishonest con- 
tractor from taking undue advantage of this sit- 
uation, the crying need of a State building code 
is apparent. With the State Contractors’ License 
Department prepared to enforce a State code, 
much grief and distress could be saved those who 
build outside our cities, and we would have an- 
other strangle hold on the fraudulent contractor, 


In closing, a brief analysis of the types of con- 
tractors arrested is significant. Among those for 
whom warrants have been issued, we find one 
cement contractor, one electrician, one plumber, 
one excavator, one structural steel, two plasterers, 
six painters and nine general contractors. 


While it is true that most of the general con- 
tractors arrested were small operators, a few have 
been important builders. Why they were trying to 
evade their own law, a law that means so much 
to the building industry, can only be answered by 
the conclusion that they were ignorant of the 
great good the Contractors’ Law is doing: not 
alone for the general public, the material dealer 
and the sub-contractor, but most of all for every 
general contractor in the industrial field. 


TRADE LITERATURE 


The American Radiator Company has recently 
issued two brochures entitled, respectively, “Тһе 
Radiator Goes Modern” and "Arco Radiator En- 
closures." The first named is for consumer use and 
the last named, replete with data, is planned for 
the use of architects, builders and heating con- 
tractors. 


The Kewanee Boiler Corporation has a new 
folder illustrative of their round steel boiler for 
homes and smaller buildings and to be fired either 
with oil or gas fuel. Specifications are included in 
this folder as well as measurements. A.I.A. File 


30-C-1. 


Young Radiator Company of Racine, Wiscon- 
sin, have sent ont new catalogs covering their 
unit heaters and copper connection heaters, as 
well as cabinets and enclosures. The catalogs are 
well illustrated and arranged. A.LA. File 30-D-11 
and A.LA. File 30-C-4. 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


PARIS ARCHITECT WINS 

Jean Francois Meunier of Paris, winner of 
awards in several French architectural competi- 
tions and of the Stillman prize at the Ecole des 
Beaux Arts, has been named the Delano and 
Aldrich Traveling Scholar by the Committee on 
Education of the American Institute of Archi- 
tects, it is announced by Charles Butler, chairman 
of the Committee. 

The fellowship established by Wm. A. Delano 
and Chester Aldrich of New York, enables a for- 
eign architect, sculptor, or painter, or a student 
in one or two of these arts, to spend a year of 
travel in the United States. Meunier will study 
American architecture and building methods. 

Meunier is a graduate of the Ecole des Beaux 
Arts, having received during his course there first 
medal in construction and second medals in de- 
sign. He has taken part in numerous competitions 
both of his own account and for other architects, 
and has received honorable mention in the com- 
petition for the Prix de Reconnaisance des Archi- 
tects Americains, founded by former American 
students at the Beaux Arts in appreciation of the 
free education given them by France at the school. 

Meunier has been chosen twice among the ten 
final competitors for the Prix de Rome, and he 
expects to compete again next spring. Among the 
important projects in which he has had a part are 
the plan of the City of Beyrouth, the Credit Fonc- 
ier of Brazil, the Galeries Lafayette in Paris. the 
Casino at Forges les Faux, and various factories 
and hospitals. 

The Stillman prize, established by the late 
James Stillman, New York banker, in recognition 
of the services rendered to American architecture 
by the Ecole des Beaux Arts, and the Chenavard 
prize were awarded to Meunier on a program of 
city planning. 

The French Committee which represents the 
Committee on Education of the American Insti- 
tute of Architects in Paris made the selection for 
the Delano and Aldrich fellowship award. The 


Committee is headed by Andre Arbvidson and | 


includes in its membership Gustave Jaulmes, Cam- 
ille Lefevre, Auguste Pelechet, and Georges Gro- 
mort. 

M. Arbvidson is known to Americans as the 
architect of the National City Bank Building on 
the Champs Elysees, and M. Lefevre is architect 
of the Louvre. M. Pellechet, architect of the new 
Zurich Insurance Company Building on the 
Grands Boulevards in Paris, holds the Grand 
Medaille of the Societe Centrale in Paris. 

M. Jaulmes, who in recent years has devoted 
himself to mural decoration, is the author of the 
large tapestry in Independence Hall, Philadelphia, 
depicting the departure of the American troops 
for the Great War, and of the tapestry of the 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


BAY STATE 


BRICK AND CEMENT 
COATINGS 


Have been specified 
by 
leading architects 
for 
over thirty years 


Manufactured by 
America’s Oldest Corporation 


CALIFORNIA SALES CO., INC. 


Distributors 


= San Francisco 
7 Front Street 
тати SUtter 8854 


THE BAY STATER 


E still have a limited 
supply of charts on 
hand showing the compara- 
tive cost of building materials 
and labor from January 136, 
1925, to June 30th, 1932. 


Every change is recorded in 


detail. 


Blue Prints. . $4.00 each 
Directo . . . 5.00 еасҺ 


(Remittance with order) 


—M——————— 


THE ARCHITECT 
AND ENGINEER 


1662 Russ Building 


San Francisco 


Stanley 
Ball Bearing Hinges 


FOR smooth, trouble-free operation of 
doors for the life of the building. 


You will find our ‘‘Architect’s Man- 
val of Stanley Hardware" very 
useful in making up hardware 


specifications. 


THE STANLEY WORKS 


New Britain, Conn. 
SAN FRANCISCO 
576 Manadnack Bldg.| 


LOS ANGELES 
1202 Washington Bldg. 


SEATTLE 
501 Maynard Bldg. 


Send for a copy. 


гә «З 


— — — 


à 


Complete 
the Circle of Protection 


LIFE INSURANCE 
plus 


LiFe INSURANCE TRUST 


Life insurance is good—a 
man should take out all 
he can afford. But don’t 
stop there. Remember— 
life insurance provides 
money—but л07 the abil- 
ity to manage it. 


The Life Insurance Trust 
fills this lack — completes 
the circle of protection. It 


is an arrangement Ъе- 
tween you and the bank 
providing for the collec- 
tion and investment of 
your life insurance estate, 
the payment of income to 
your dependents, and the 
final disbursement of 
principal, all exactly as 
you direct. Call or write 
for details. 


TRUST DEPARTMENT 


Wells Fargo Bank 
Union Trust Co, 


Since 1852 

Two Offices: 
Market at Montgomery and 
Market at Grant Avenue 


SAN FRANCISCO 


Rivers of France in the salon of the steamship 
Пе de France. М. Gromort is a professor of ar- 
chitecture at the Ecole des Beaux Arts. 

Meunier is the third winner of the Delano and 
Aldrich scholarship, which was first instituted as 
an experiment in the development of the Insti- 
tute’s program of international relations. 


MINIATURE PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM 


The latest convenience for this year's political 
campaigners or any other speakers who address 
meetings where no amplifying facilities are avail- 
able, comes to light in the announcement of the 
Western Electric Company that there is available 
a complete public address system so small that it 
fits into a suitcase and is carried around by hand. 
This system was designed by Bell Telephone Lab- 
oratories. The amplifier in the system has a gain 
of 71 decibels, enough to magnify the speaker's 
voice from one to many thousand times its natural 
loudness according to the surroundings. 

The entire equipment, including the case, weighs 
70 pounds. The equipment includes the amplifier, 
a loudspeaker, a control unit and the necessary 
connections. It operates from the regular alternat- 
ing current electric power supply. 

To make its convenience complete, the miniature 
public address system is arranged for use with 
another miniature device developed by the same 
engineers, the so-called lapel microphone which 
came into prominence during the broadcasting of 
the national party conventions at Chicago. When 
the orator arrives at his indoor or outdoor meeting, 
all he does is set the cast down in a good place, 
plug in on the electric light line, pin the tiny micro- 
phone on his lapel, step up on the platform and 
commence talking in his ordinary tone. The wire 
from the microphone gives him 30 feet in which 
to make dramatic strides and gestures. An assist- 
ant seated inconspicuously as far as 50 feet away 
can, by means of remote volume control, help the 
speaker punctuate his points without actually rais- 
ing his voice. 

'The system can also be used with an electrical 
reproducer to amplify phonograph records of 
music or prepared speeches. 

The case into which the equipment fits is 1934 
inches square and 101% inches deep. The case 
contains a bracket for carrying spare vacuum 
tubes. А three-stage amplifier is used. Each of 
the first two stages employs a single vacuum tube, 
while the last stage uses two tubes in a push-pull 
circuit. 'Тһе amplifier has an adequately uniform 
frequency characteristic between 70 and 7,000 
cycles and an undistorted peak output power of 
3 watts. 

The power supply equipment inside the amp- 
lifier unit itself consists of a transformer, a West- 
ern Electric full wave rectifier tube and a filter 


The Architcct and Enginccr, October, 1932 


circuit. This equipment provides direct current for 
operation of the amplifier, the loudspeaker and 
the microphone. The filaments of the vacuum tubes 
are operated on alternating current directly from 
the transformer. 

'The loudspeaker is of a dynamic type and is 
mounted on a wooden baffle board in front of the 
carrying case. The Western Electric lapel micro- 
phone is 114 inches in diameter and is a carbon 
button transmitter encased in soft rubber with a 
metal clip for fastening to the user's clothing. The 
microphone control unit consists essentially of a 
network through which the current for the micro- 
phone is obtained; a repeating coil which couples 
the microphone to the amplifier and an external 
or remote volume control. The volume is controlled 
by means of a potentiometer which is connected 
to the microphone control unit by a 30-foot cord. 

As accessory equipment, a control cabinet is 
available which permits the connection of any one 
of five microphones to the amplifying system. This 
cabinet provides noiseless switching and facilities 
for supplying current to the microphone. 


OFFICERS CHOSEN 

Tacoma Architects, Incorporated, has as its ob- 
ject the practice of architecture with activities lim- 
ited to public work. The officers are: President, 
Stanley T. Shaw; Vice-President, Earl N. Dugan; 
Secretary, Fred G. Rounds; Treasurer, George 
W. Bullard, and Board of Directors, Roland E. 
Borhek, Ernest T. Mock and A. J. Russell. 

This corporation is co-operating with the Down- 
town Association, an organization of property 
owners, building managers and tenants, in the 
project to improve Pacific Avenue from 9th to 
11th Street. Preliminary sketches have been рге- 
pared and approved. The project contemplates 
such remodeling of the fronts of the building as 
may be desired to bring a more uniform treatment 
of facades as to details, skylines, materials, etc. 
The treatment of the individual store front will 
vary to meet the specific requirements. 


W. С. HAYS BUSY 
New work in the office of W. C. Hays, Crocker 
First National Bank Building, San Francisco, in- 
cludes remodeling a store and loft building in 
Oakland and a two story residence in Merced 
Manor, San Francisco, for F. S. Durie. 


PRINTING PLANT 
A two story reinforced concrete printing plant 
will be built on Washington Street, near the Em- 
barcadero, San Francisco, for the Edward Barry 
Company. H. A. Minton is the architect and 
L. H. Nishkian the engineer. 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


1044-1058 Forty-seventh Avenue 
OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 
Telephone: FR uitvale 8305-8306 


Product of S 
CALIFORNIA SHADE CLOTH CO. 


1710 San Bruno Avenue, San Francisco 


Manufacturers of 
QUALITY HAND MADE SHADE CLOTH 
IN ALL GRADES 


Wholesale Distributors 


SLOANE-BLABON LINOLEUM 


Oil Heaters 
Relief Valves 
Oil-Burner Governors 
Little Giant Improved 
Gas Burners Oil Burners 

Gas Burning Eqnipment ОП Pumping Sets 
Vacuum Pump Governors Oil Valves 

Vacuum Regulating Oil Strainers 


Pump Governors 
Safety Pump Governors 
Automatic Gas Regulat- 
ing Valves 


Valves Steam Oil Strainers 
MU Flow Steam Duplex Oil Pumps 
Thermostata су Hipp 


Boiler Feed Pumps 
Water Heaters 
Oil Meters 


Redocing Valves 
Boiler Feed-Water 
Regulators 


VAUGHN -С. Е. WITT CO., Engineers 
С. W. VAUGHN, President and Manager 
MANUFACTURERS AND DISTRIBUTORS 


4224-28 Hollis St. Phone OL ympic 6084 
Emeryville, Oakland, Calif. 


Reinforcing Steel and Accessories 

Medusa White Cement, and Cement Paint 

Cabots Stains, Collopakes, Waterproofing, 
Insulating Quilt 

Duraflex Flooring and Tile 

Duplex-Krause Incinerators 

Venetian Window Blinds 


GUNN, CARLE & CO. 


20 Potrero Ave. UNderhill 5480 
San Franciseo 


83 


HEATING * COOKING 


WATER HEATING ° REFRIGERATION 


Quick Clean Economical 


the modern fuel 


Satisfies owners... 
... pleases tenants 


The Modern Way— 
BUILD WITH STEEL 


Protect your Investment from 
Fire and Quake 
Structural Steel for Buildings 
and Bridges 


JUDSON-PACIFIC CO. 


609 MISSION STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 
DOuglas 4460 


Plants, San Francisco aud Oakland 


MARELE CLASS 


А new decorative building material of 

exceptional beauty—looks like genuine 

marble with its innumerable delicate 
veins and royal colors. 


For New ond Remodeled Build- 
ings, Store Fronts, Hotel Lobbies, Ў 


Office Buildings, Vestibules, Etc. 


MacGRUER & COMPANY 


266 Tehama Street San Francisco 


W.8 J. SLOANE 


Established 1843 


RUGS : CARPETS 
LINOLEUMS 
WINDOW SHADES 
Phone: GArfield 2827 
FURNITURE 


DRAPERIES 
Estimates Gladly Submitted 


216-228 SUTTER STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 


84 


WASHINGTON ARCHITECTS 
INCORPORATE 


Washington State Chapter helds its meeting 
for September, the first after the summer vacation, 
on the evening of Thursday, September 8. A con- 
siderable number of Tacoma members were in at- 
tendance and joined with the Seattle participants 
in enjoying the excellent dinner. 


The meeting was called to order by President 
Holmes at 7:15 p. m. The minutes of the last 
regular meeting, held in June, were read and ap- 
proved, as was also the report of the treasurer. 
This was followed by the reading of a letter from 
Mr. D. Knickerbacker Boyd of Philadelphia, giv- 
ing an interesting account of ceremonies in honor 
of deceased architects conducted by the Philadel- 
phia Chapter, with the idea that this custom might 
be more generally adopted. This was referred to 
the Chapter Committee on Public Information. 


{n conformity with a resolution passed at the 
above meeting, a special meeting was called by 
the president, September 16, for the consideration 
of Articles of Incorporation for the proposed 
Washington Architects Incorporated, which is 
to engage in the practice of architecture for U. S. 
Government work to give general relief to the 
architects and draftsmen throughout the state. 


The meeting was called to order after luncheon 
by President Holmes, who stated the purpose of 
the meeting and presented a proposed draft of 
articles of incorporation, which, he stated, had 
been drawn with competent legal advice to fulfill 
the purposes intended. 


The proposed draft was discussed in detail and 
after some amendments providing for the election 
of the five directors to represent the three organ- 
izations now supporting the movement, the Chap- 
ter, State Society and Tacoma Society of Archi- 
tects, with a representative of the architects of 
Seattle and of eastern Washington, the proposed 
articles of incorporation were unanimously ap- 
proved. 


J. Lister Holmes of the Washington State 
Chapter, A.I.A., William J. Jones of the State 
Society, and Roland E. Borhek of the Tacoma 
Society of Architects, having been already se- 
lected by their respective organizations, А. M. 
Young of Seattle and Stanley А. Smith of Pullman 
were selected to complete the quota of directors 
and facilitate organization. 


SPOKANE SOCIETY OF ARCHITECTS 

А committee consisting of Henry Bertelsen and 
Claude Butcher, from the Spokane Society of 
Architects, together with a representative of the 
Hoo Hoo Club, judged drawings made by the 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


three high schools of the city of Spokane. Prizes 
were awarded each school for the best small house 
plans. 

The anniversary of the Spokane Society was 
celebrated July 10 when members and their fami- 
lies gathered at Granite Point on Loon Lake for 
a swim and picnic supper. It was said that the 
appearance of the secretary in a bathing suit was 
alone worth the trip out. 

The Spokane Society was represented on the 
State legislative ticket by Roland M. Vantyne, 
who filed for Representative from his district. 
Having failed to receive the required number of 
votes, however, his name will not appear on the 
ballot at the general election. 

Noel Thompson informally presented a resume 
of a recent article in "Fortune" on the built-to- 
order house being manufactured by General 
Houses. И was the consensus of opinion that 
houses could not be marketed like electric refrig- 
erators in the Northwest district, with any degree 
of success or profit. 

On September 2 the meeting was addressed by 
А. M. Young of Schack and Young, Seattle. Mr. 
Young's mission was to give the Spokane group a 
first-hand, intimate picture of the projected plan 
to unite the architects of the State into a corporate 
body for the handling of Federal building work. 
The many points set forth for the plan were thor- 
oughly discussed by the membership with Mr. 
Young. While many in the Spokane Society will 
become members by virtue of their memberships 
in the Chapter and State Society, the Spokane 
Society voted not to enter as an organization. 

Subjects announced for meetings in the near 
future include a talk on paint by a factory repre- 
sentative of the Benjamin F. Moore Company, 
and a meeting of high school drawing teachers for 
the discussion of the subject of architectural 
drawing. 


NORRIS В. ALLEN 

With the passing of Norris B. Allan on Sep- 
tember 25, the Washington State Chapter, A.I.A., 
mourns the loss of one of its members who helped 
to uphold the principles of the profession in the 
early days of the Chapter’s existence. Forming 
a partnership with the late Timotheus Josenhans, 
Mr. Allan practiced for a number of years under 
the firm name of Josenhans and Allan, and later 
became attached to the Building Department of 
the City of Seattle. 


OAKLAND STORE BUILDING 
Plans have been prepared by J. W. Oliver of 
Oakland for a two story Class C store and loft 
building on Lakeshore Avenue for the Eureka 


Properties Company. The cost is estimated at 
$15,000. 


The Architcct and Engineer, October, 1932 


ARCHITECTS, We Specialize in 


SOUND CONTROL 


and 


Insulation Materials 


E. K. WOOD LUMBER CO. 
Lumber and Millwork 


SAN FRANCISCO - OAKLAND - LOS ANGELES 


Recent Contracts Completed— 


FORD ASSEMBLY PLANTS AT 
SEATTLE, LONG BEACH 
AND RICHMOND 


Clinton Construction Company 
of California 


Builders and Managers 


of Construction 


923 FOLSOM STREET SAN FRANCISCO 
Telephone SUtrer 3440 


WALKER - WILKESON 
SANDSTONE 


Sawed Stone 


Building Stone Rip Rap 
The Nation's Finest Stone 
HOYT M. LESHER 
California Representative 


503 Market St., San Francisco 
Telephone: DOuglas 6436 


Walker Cut Stone 
Plant: Tacoma, Wash. 


Quarries at 
Wilkeson, Wash. 


KAWNEER 
MODERNISTIC CONSTRUCTION 
FOR 
Topay’s STORE FRONT 


Through years of experience Kawneer 
craftsmen have acquired the art of ren- 
dering in metal distinctive and efficient 
store fronts of any size or design. 


KAWNEER MFG. CO. 


BERKELEY CALIFORNIA 


ne 


Gladding Bros. 
Mfg. Co. 


BURNED CLAY PRODUCTS 
ROOF TILE 
COMMON AND FACE BRICK 
FLOOR TILE 
VITRIFIED SEWER PIPE 
DRAIN TILE 
CHIMNEY PIPE 
FLUE LINING 


PLANT AND OFFICE: 
THIRD AND KEYES STREETS 
Ballard 7570 San Jose, Calif. 


< 
we 
BOILERS 


for 
Every Purpose 


637 Minna Strect, San Francisco, Calif. 
Phone: MArket 3612 


„о 


AMERICAN 


MARBLE 
COMPANY 


— 


Office and Factory 
Swift Ave. and Canal 
Р. О. Вох 578 
South San Francisco, Calif. 


SUtter 2840 South San Francisco 161 


р 


JOSEPH MUSTO 
SONS-KEENAN 
COMPANY 


MARBLE 


and 


ONYX 


535 NORTH POINT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


1801 S. SOTO STREET 
LOS ANGELES 


86 


DISCUSS WATER CONTROL 

The Los Angeles Section of the 
American Society of Civil Engi- 
neers resumed their monthly meet- 
ings after the summer recess, at 
a dinner meeting September 14, 
at the Engineers Club, Los Ange- 
les. There were approximately 
110 members and guests in attend- 
ance. 

А. E. Burt, М. Am. Soc., C. E, 
construction engineer, Los Angeles 
County Road Department, pre- 
sented a brief paper entitled, "Ap- 
plication of Water Control in 
Concrete Pavement Construc- 
tion." Compression tests made 
from cores from concrete pave- 
ment laid in the county showed a 
wide variance in results. It was 
concluded from studies of the 
methods of mixing and laying, that 
water content of the mixture was 
an important factor in the cause 
of the varying results. In 1930 a 
test job was laid, consisting of 
seven strips 100 feet long and 10 
feet wide, in which the water con- 
tent was accurately controlled and 
varied from 6.8 gallons per sack 
of cement to 4 gallons per sack or 
almost an unworkable concrete. 
Ten cores from each strip were 
taken when 30 days old and the 
compressive strength ranged from 
an average of 3062 lbs., to 4474 
Ibs, per square inch. These tests 
demonstrated the benefit of rea- 
sonably accurate water control. 


Observations and tests made of 
concrete where the water control 
is left to the judgment of the 
mixer operator showed a wide var- 
iance in strength in successive 
batches. The water control should 
be under the direction of the in- 
spector or engineer in charge of 
the job. 


Positive water control gives 
other intangible benefits, as it re- 
duces controversies between con- 
tractor and engineer, re duces 
shrinkage, cracking and internal 
stresses. À concrete of uniform 
consistency also is more easily fin- 
ished to a true surface. 


F. А. Schilling, Assoc. M. Ам. 
Soc. C. E, president, Desert 


Draughting & Engineering 
Service, Inc. 


\ 654 Mission St. 
: San Francisco 


Phone: 
SUtter 1286 


ENGINEERS— 
Consulting 
Mechanical 
Electrical 


“Theatres our Specialty” 


CHAS. STOCKHOLM 
& SONS 


Contractors 


Russ Building, San Francisco 


Phone DO uglas 4420 


Del Monte 
WHITE SAND 
Fan Shell — Beach 


WASHED IN FRESH WATER 
DRIED BY STEAM 
CLEAN BONE DRY 


суо 


Del Monte Properties Company 
Phone SUtter 6130 


401 Crocker Building San Franicsco 


Specify 


DICKEY 


CLAY 
PRODUCTS 


Dickey Mastertile Face Brick 

Partition Tile Fire Brick 

Drain Tile Paving Brick 
Fireproofing Tile Wall Coping 

Floor Tile Flue Lining 

Roof Tile Dickey Flashing Biocks 


W. S. DICKEY CLAY MFG. 


COMPANY 
SAN FRANCISCO 


Tma 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


MeClintic-Marshall 


Corporation 
Subsidiary of Ed Steel 
Bethlehem WAA Corporation 


STEEL BRIDGES 
and BUILDINGS 


215 WEST SIXTH STREET 
LOS ANGELES 


2050 BRYANT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


A Thatched Roof in 
California Redwood 


A life time House Covering 
combining Beauty and 
Durability 


Manufactured by 
HOLMES EUREKA 
LUMBER COMPANY 


947 Monadnock Building, San Francisco 


Handted by Established Retail Distributors 


ARMCO 


Special Analysis 
Iron and Steel 

Sheets and Plates 

For Building Construction 
e 
THE AMERICAN ROLLING MILL СО, 

540 Tenth Sireet, San Francisco 

Phone: MArket 3495 
32 W. Connecticut Street, Seattle 


v 


Specify Armco Sheets and 
Plates for all purposes 
where durable, finely- 
finished construction is 
required, 


ORNAMENTAL поп, 
Ariston Steel Windowse 
Bronze, Aluminume 
Ariston Steel Buildings 


Michel & Pfeffer 
Iron Works, Inc. 


10th & Harrison Sts. 
San Franelsco 
Tel. HEmlock 3080 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


Farum, Pasadena, gave a very in- 
teresting talk on the life, works, 
mode of living, arts and legends 
of the prehistoric Indians of Ari- 
zona and New Mexico. The talk 
was illustrated with lantern slides 
showing views of the ruins of 
houses and villages that have been 
excavated by various archeological 
societies, the pueblos and cliff 
dwellings, the Casa Grande ruins, 
and pictures of the early arts of 
basket weaving, pottery making, 
stone implements, and ornaments 
recovered from the ruins. 


Dates of construction of these 
pre-historic villages have been es- 
timated by the examination of 
pieces of timbers that have been 
excavated from the ruins. Dr. 
Douglas of Arizona University at 
Tucson, has made a very compre- 
hensive study of the ages of trees, 
from the growth and characterist- 
ics of the rings. From this infor- 
mation Dr. Douglas and Mr. Judd 
of the National Museum at Wash- 
ington have compared the rings 
of the ancient timbers with growths 
of trees that extend back several 
thousand years. From this it has 
been estimated that the earliest 
tribes known as basket makers, 
built their structures some 1000 
to 1500 years B. C. The Mesa 
ruins were constructed between 
1073 and 1262; the "white house" 
in 1275; and the Casa Grande 


ruins in 1365. 


The extensive pre-historic canal 
system in the vicinity of Phoenix, 
Arizona, is one of the wonders of 
pre-historic construction — how 
these pre-historic people could 
construct many miles of irrigation 
canals and laterals, excavate mil- 
lions of cubic yards of earth and 
through rock ledges with the prim- 
itive stone tools, and baskets with 
which to transport the waste ma- 
terial. No existing data or rec- 
ords have been found to identify 
the age, type, or tribe of people 
that constructed this great system 
of canals. 


YOUNG 
& 
HORSTMEYER 


GENERAL 
CONTRACTORS 


461 Market Street 


San Francisco 


Phone SUtter 6257—58 


Paul B. Young А. L. Horsimeyer 


RAY COOK 
MARBLE CO. 


IMPORTED AND DOMESTIC 
MARBLES 


For Building Construction 


Factory and Office: 
FOOT OF POWELL ВТ, OAKLAND 
Phone Piedmont 1009 


$ 


MERCURY PRESS 


We Print 
The ARCHITECT and 
ENGINEER 


“A Thing of Beauty 
Is a Joy Forever” 


942 HOWARD STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


Grinnell Automatic 
SPRINKLER 


GRINNELL COMPANY 
OF THE PACIFIC 
ENGINEERS AND 
CONTRACTORS 


VALVES, PIPE and FITTINGS 
CHEMICAL FIRE EXTINGUISHERS 
and FIRE ENGINES 


Fifth and Brannan Streets 
San Francisco 


87 


Phone DOuglas 1120-1121 


Larsen and Larsen 


General Contractors 


w 


629 BRYANT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


FORDERER 
CORNICE WORKS 


Copper Roofs 
Galvanized Iron Work 
Elevator Doors 


269 Potrero Avenue, San Francisco 
Phone HEmlock 4100 


Robert W. Hunt Company 
ENGINEERS 
Inspection - Tests - Consultation 


Inspection and Tests of Structural 
Steel, Reinforcing Steel 
and Cement. 

Ficld Inspection and Supervision 
of Consruction of Steel and 
Concrete Structures. 
Cement, Concrete, Chemical, Met- 
allurgical, X-Ray and Physical 
Laboratories. 


Chicago - New York - Pittsburgh 
АП Large Cities 
San Francisco, 251 Kearny Street 


a —MMMM—————— дд 


Chicago 


HOSPITAL 


SILENT CALL 
SIGNAL SYSTEMS 


GARNETT YOUNG AND CO. 
Paclfic Coast Sales Engineers 

390 FOURTH ST., SAN FRANCISCO 

Los Angeles 


Seattla Portland 


88 


PRE-FABRICATED HOUSE 

Plans for a five-room one-story 
pre-fabricated house have been 
prepared by the National Lumber 
Manufacturers Association and 
they have been submitted to a 
number of representative retail 
lumber dealers and manufacturers 
in various parts of the county for 
criticisms and suggestions. The 
house will be 24x36 ft. and will 
consist of 150 fabricated sections. 
The plans have been worked out 
so that the parts can be made at 
a yard or plant equipped with fa- 
cilities for doing the work. The 
parts will be assembled on the 
building site. The frame is not 
segregated from the walls and the 
sections or panels are complete 
with doors, windows, screens, 
blinds, etc. 'The exterior may be 
of siding, shingles or stucco. The 
porch, cornice work, and the fin- 
ished floor are to be put in place 
subsequent to assembly of the 
panels. 

The interior of the house will 
be entirely finished in sawn inch- 
lumber which may be painted or 
finished in natural colors. Wall, 
floor and ceiling panels will be in- 
sulated with a filling material of 
wood derivation. The house will 
have no basement, but a heater 
room with a fuel storage space is 
provided on a level about two feet 
below an opening off the kitchen. 
The cost of this manufactured 
dwelling is estimated at about 
$2,500. 


LOS ANGELES SCHOOLS 


'The sale of $1,560,000 worth of 
Los Angeles city school bonds to 
the Bank of America, which was 
approved by the Board of Educa- 
tion, will mean the beginning of 
more than one million dollars 
worth of construction work within 
the next thirty days, according to 
William E. Record, business inan- 
ager, who has been negotiating the 
sale of the bonds for the past two 
months. 


Dr. A. H. Giannini, chairman 
of the bank's general executive 
committee, said: ‘Construction 


REG. U. S. PAT. OFF. 


“Моге than a 


building paper" 


ww 


THE SISALKRAFT CO. 


205 West Wacker Drive 
(Canal Station) Chicago, Ш, 


55 New Montgomery Street 
San Francisco, Calif. 


CRANE 


High Class Plumbing 
Fixtures 


+ 


n ІП 


ALL Principat Coasr CITIES 


THE TORMEY 
COMPANY 


GENERAL PAINTERS 
AND DECORATORS 


Phone WA Inut 3639 


563 FULTON STREET 


San Francisco 


W. H. PICARD, Inc. 


PLUMBING, HEATING, 
VENTILATING and 
POWER PLANTS 


5656 College Avenue 
5662 Keith Avenue 


Oakland California 
Phones PI edmont 9004-9005 


The Architect and Engincer, October, 1932 


OCEAN SHORE 


IRON WORKS 


550-558 EIGHTH STREET 
MA rket 0462-0463 


San Francisco California 


EN 

b 4 
STEAM BOILERS 
STEEL TANKS 


SMOKE STACKS 
e WATER » 
е HEATERS ® 


LUXOR 


WINDOW SHADES 


Translucent Shading 
of highest count 
cambric 


William Volker & Co. 


631 Howard Street 
San Francisco 


CLERVI 
MARBLE CO. 


MANUFACTURING CONTRACTORS 


Foreign and Domestic 
Marbles 


Interior & Exterior Buildings 


Office & Mill, 1721 San Bruno Ave. 


Phone MI asion 6625 
SAN FRANCISCU, CAL. 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


vital to the welfare of the Los Ап- 
geles schools has been held up for 
more than six months, because of 
the inability to dispose of bonds 
voted by our citizens. It is with 
the desire to start this needed con- 
struction and to put men to work 
that the Bank of America offered 
to buy these bonds at par. On the 
present market four and one-half 
per cent municipals have no buy- 
ers, and the Bank of America, 
which has been preaching 'Back 
to Good Times’ is now translat- 
ing words into action by buying 
these bonds and putting them into 
the bank's reserves." 

Negotiations for the sale of the 
bonds were opened by Manager 
Record last August, after a dead- 
lock of four months when all ef- 
forts to sell the bonds, which could 
only be sold at par, had failed. 
Mr. Record went to San Francisco 
to open negotiations with the chief 
executives of the Bank of Amer- 
ica, and the purchase has been 
pending since that time. 

"Plans are drawn, details are 
worked out, and we are all ready 
to start construction as soon as the 
bids may be advertised and the 
contracts awarded," Mr. Record 
said. "As soon as these final steps 
are concluded work will begin that 
will give employment to several 
hundred men." 

Among the buildings planned 
and for which specifications are 
now ready are: Elementary: Ascot 
Avenue school, $84,000 approxi- 
mate cost; Fifty-ninth street, $20,- 
000: Graham, $623,000; Hadden 
street, $72,000; Ninth street, 
$100,000; Tenth street, $56,000; 
Topeka Drive, $72.000. This 
makes a total of $467,000 struc- 
tures, some of which are additions 
to established schools, and some 
are replacements of obsolete build- 
ings. 

In the junior and senior high 
schools, need for additional space 
has long been felt at the follow- 
ing: Hollywood High School, an 
addition to cost approximately 
$100.000; Lafayette Junior High 
School, $50.000; William McKin- 
ley Junior High School, $25,000; 


“ү died 


S үс =< "v yey een 
; N K 3 
N i 
N 
SALUS. 
N 


{лн RESI Же rene 

№25 STET. AN AN 1 
IRURE Sg 

‘SECTIONAL’ ‘PARTITIONS A A 
Telephbne" "KÉEarny 1 Біз : 
RANNAN ӨТӨ san Peco, 

M Ө 

M Sup CW әм 

N Y NS а E 
ы NI А; "€ xD, КУ Ж 


а 


Yr 


556. BRANNAN | BT 


wes 


BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 


Recent Contracts Completed 
Y. W. C. A. Building 
San Francisco 

Library Building 
Berkeley 

Post Office Building 
Oakland 

City Hospital 
Palo Alto 

Home of the Blind 
Berkeley 


К. Е. PARKER CO., INC. 
135 South Park San Francisco 
Phone KE arny 6640 


Phone GArfield 1164 


Hunter & Hudson 


Consulting Engineers 


DESIGNERS OF HEATING 
AIR CONDITIONING 
VENTILATING AND WIRING 
SYSTEMS, MECHANICAL 
AND ELECTRICAL EQUIP- 
MENT OF BUILDINGS 
Cro 
41 SUTTER STREET 


ROOM 710 


San Francisco California 


S. RASORI 


General Contractor for 
St. Anne’s Church, 


San Francisco 


v 


74 New Montgomery Street 


San Francisco 


Phone KEarny 3537 


89 


90 


McNEAR BRICK 


FOR 
Beauty and 
Permanence 
OW 
McNear Brick Company 


Main Office and Factories 
McNEAR POINT 
San Rafael, Calif. 


San Francisco Office and Yard 


417 BERRY STREET 


Arehiteetural 
Metals 


Mouldings > Grilles 
Tubing ~- Ornaments 
of 27 
Steel >< Bronze 
Aluminum 


BRAUN-STEEPLE CO.,LTD. 
636 Potrero Avenue 
San Francisco 
1203 E. 8th Street 
Los Angeles 


APEX 
A ELECTRICv«« 
HEATERS 


]t costs less to 
install an APEX 
Electric heater 
in the bathroom 
than to install a 
hot air duct or 
radiator. Heat is 
available twenty- 
four hours per 
day and it quali- 
fies for the low 
heating rate. 


Send for Architects’ Catalogue 


Bathroom Heaters in the Standard 
Colors, 1000 to 2500 Watts 
$12.50 to $35.00 


APEX MANUFACTURING CO. 
1501 Powell Street 
Emeryville, Oakland, Calif. 


Distributors 
Sandoval Sales Co. 
Phone KE arny 7010 
557 Market Street 
San Francisco, Calif. 


Apex Sales Co. 
Phone MU tual 9141 
1855 Industrial Street 

Los Angeles, Calif. 


Nathaniel Narbonne, $84.000; San 
Fernando High School, $125,000; 
University High School, $84,000; 
and Van Nuys, $84,000. ‘These 
outlays total $552,000. 


LUMBER SALES INCREASE 

Although orders received at the 
lumber mills during the week end- 
ed September 24 were not so large 
as for the previous week, they 
were well above the average of 
the year to date and within three 
per cent of the new business of 
the corresponding week of 1931, 
according to telegraphic reports to 
the National Lumber Manufactur- 
ers Association, from regional as- 
sociations covering the operations 
of leading softwood and hardwood 
mills. 

General industry reports indi- 
cate more activity in the past 
three or four weeks, either in the 
form of orders or inquiries from 
lumber consumers, both for fac- 
tory use and construction, than in 
many months. The volume of or- 
ders, however, though encourag- 
ing, in view of the industry's large 
aggregate stocks, is not sufficient 
to warrant an increase in produc- 
tion. Stocks at the mills though 
declining, are still excessive. 

Orders received the first week 
in September by the 644 mills re- 
porting to the National Associa- 
tion were 176,754,000 feet or 53 
per cent above production. Pro- 
duction was 115,384,000 feet. 
Identical mills reported production 
36 per cent below the correspond- 
ing week of 1931, compared with 
40 per cent below the previous 
week. 


INVITATION TO 
ARCHITECTS 

Architects who are interested 
in housing, either with respect to 
the technique of site planning and 
large scale operation or with re- 
spect to the formulation and sup- 
port of state housing laws de- 
signed to open up the credit reser- 
voir of the Reconstruction Finance 
Corporation, will find it both in- 
teresting and profitable to be in 
Pittsburgh during the meetings of 


MULLEN MFG. 
COMPANY 


BANK, STORE AND OFFICE 

FIXTURES—CABINET WORK 

OF GUARANTEED QUALITY 
CHURCH SEATING 


Office and Factory: 
64 RAUSCH ST., Bet. 7th and 8th Sts. 
San Franciaco 
Telephone НЕ mlock 2858 


G. P. W. Jensen & Son 


Building Construction 


320 Market Street, San Francisco 
Phone 2444 


GENERAL 
ROOFING CO. 


HARRY HENNINGS 


Office and Warehouse: 
BEACH AND HALLECK STS. 
OAKLAND, CALIF. 


Member Builders Exchange 
Telephone OLympic 5208 


Bates-Darpenter Company 


Distributors of 
Building Specialties 

Announce 
Their appointment by the 
AUTOMATIC TENSION 

ROLLER SCREEN CO. 
of Los Angeles 

as exclusive distributors for 
Northern California and Reno, 
Nevada. 


ww 

Estimates furnished without obligation 
557 Market Street 

San Francisco, Calif. SUtter 5328 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


SUNSET 
LUMBER COMPANY 


Registered Architectural 
Woodwork 


pum d 


Pine and Redwood 
Lumber 


pnmum б 


400 High Street, Oakland 
Phone ANdover 1000 


© What architects and all who build have 
mM learned to expect from Quandt craftsmen: 


ООРОО АСКОЕ АОС SMS CY 
: 


(6 Materials applied efficiently and expeditiously 
Қ by brush or spray application to achieve the 
>} best result at the minimum cost to the owner, | 


"Co-operation for Quality” | 
ы 


| A. Quandt & Sons 


Painters and Decerators j 
Since 1885 J 
374 GUERRERO STREET, SAN FRANCISCO Wd 
XC Telephone MArket 1711 
ewe 

И Quandt-quality is available for the small job 
M as well as the large, Pioneers and Special- 
ists in the application of Lacquer in the 
architectural field. Complete decorative 
W color schemes designed and furnished. 
3 Advice for technical painting requirements 
furnished. Our operations are state-wide. 


OO CEES 52 


ООО 


WEOGE NOTCH COLUMN CLAMPS 


Rapidity, Economy 
and Efficiency 
USE 
STEELFORMS 
FOR 
Concrete Construction 


SCAFFOLDS 


ANCHOR SLOT 


STEELFORM 
CONTRACTING CO. 


AN FRANCISCO 
ORTLAND 


DOVETAIL 


Los ANGELES 
SEATTLE 


LITTLE WONDER 


5 
Р. 


STEEL, CONSTRUCTION TOWERS 


Pine and Redwood 


Lumber 


Creo-Dipt Stained Shingles 


А. J. Russell, Mgr. 
16 California St. 


San Francisco, 
Calif. 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


the National Conference on City 
Planning. November 14-16. 

Frederick Bigger, Chairman of 
the Institute's Committee on Eco- 
nomics of Site Planning and 
Housing. expects to have a meet- 
ing of his committee at that time, 
supplementing the meetings of the 
planning body, and hopes that no 
interested architect will hesitate 
to join that particular group for 
round table discussion. Robert D. 
Kohn, who heads a subcommittee 
to promote and assist in formula- 
tion of state housing laws, believes 
that the members of the architec- 
tural profession should know of, 
and be invited to attend, the Pitts- 
burgh meetings. 

The sessions of the National 
Conference on City Planning on 
Monday. November 14, will be 
devoted entirely to housing. 


NORTHERN CALIFORNIA 
CHAPTER 

А meeting of the Northern Cali- 
fornia Chapter, the American In- 
stitute of Architects, was held 
jointly with the State Association 
of California Architects on the 
evening of September 27, at the 
Stewart Hotel, San Francisco. 

Proceeding with business, the 
minutes of the previous meeting 
were approved as published. 

The following resolution was 
introduced and upon motion of 
Mr. Ashley, duly seconded, was 
unanimously favored: 

Whereas: The City of San 
Francisco has at great expense 
provided for the enjoyment of its 
citizens and guests one of the most 


В. A. HAWKINS 
& CO. 
ж 


Successors 1o 


R. McLERAN & CO. 


General Contractors 


Ж 


HEARST BUILDING 
SAN FRANCISCO 
Phone SUtter 5198 


Fenestra 


STEEL 
WINDOWS 


For Every Type of Building 


DETROIT STEEL PRODUCTS 
COMPANY 
Pacific Coast Factory: Oaklend 
Bronches 
San Francisco 


Los Angeles 


Seattle 


Good BuildingsDeserve 
Good Hardware 


CORBIN 


(PALACE HARDWARE GO 


581 Market Street 
SUtter 6063 


Office 


Partitions 


Reinhold sectional wood and 
glass partitions (interchange- 
able) may be adapted to any 
modern office requirement in a 
new or old building. 


Complete Information File 
sent on request 


Pacific Manufacturing 
Company 
High Class Interior Finish 
Quality Millwork 


Monadnock Bldg., 
Sen Frencieco 
GA rfield 7755 


641 Merrill Ave., 
Loe Angeles 
АХ ridge 9011 


1315 Seventh Street, Oakland 
GL encourt 7858 


91 


Structural 


Steel 


Fabrication and Erection 


а с> о) 
Pacific Coast 
Engineering Co. 
Foot of 14th St., Oakland 
HI gate 1322 


Anderson & Ringrose 


General Contractors 


320 Market Street, San Francisco 
Phone DO uglas 1373 


LEA THER-STEEL 
RUBBER-COCOA 
WOOD 


Mats and Mattings 
Ezy-Rug Carpet-Tex 


Manufactured and Installed by 


LEATHER 
MAT MFG. CO.. Inc. 


340 Sansome St. San Francisco 


DINWIDDIE 
CONSTRUCTION 
COMPANY 


Builders of the new gymna- 
sium, University of Cali- 
fornia; Grace Cathedral, 
Russ Building and Hartford 
Insurance Building, San 
Francisco; Life Science 
Building, University of Cali- 
fornia, Berkeley. 


CROCKER BUILDING 
SAN FRANCISCO 
——À———————— MÀ 9 


92 


important Civic Centers in the 
Country; and 

Whereas: The temporary grand- 
stands erected therein for the re- 
cent Shriner's Conclave entirely 
destroy the effect of its impressive 
design, constituting in addition a 
serious fire menace to the build- 
ings thereof, as well as a substan- 
tial damage to the Civic Center 
planting; and 

Whereas: For no known public 
reason certain sections of these 
grandstands remain in place near- 
ly two months after their use has 
ceased; and 

Whereas: This procedure is un- 
worthy of the spirit of a great 
city; now therefore be it 

Resolved: That the Northern 
California Chapter, the American 
Institute of Architects condemn 
the authorization of this desecra- 
tion of the Civic Center; and be it 
further 

Resolved: That the Northern 
California Chapter, the American 
Institute of Architects, urge that 
in the future no such use of the 
Civic Center or other developed 
public places of the City be toler- 
ated under any pretext or circum- 
stances; and be it further 

Resolved: That copies of these 
Resolutions be transmitted to any 
and ail authorities that may be 
concerned, including The Mayor, 
The Board of Supervisors. The 
Chief Administrative Officer, The 
Board of Public Works, The Park 
Commission, The Art Commission, 
all of the City and County of San 
Francisco. 

The Nominating Committee re- 
ported its selection of candidates 
for the offices of the Chapter, for 
the year 1932-1933, to be as fol- 
lows: 

John J. Donovan, President; 
Raymond W. Jeans, Vice-Presi- 
dent; James H. Mitchell, Secretary- 
Treasurer; Henry H. Gutterson, 
Director, two years; Roland I. 
Stringham, Director, three years; 
George R. Klinkhardt, Director, 
three years. 

Upon motion, 
accepted, 


the report was 


STRUCTURAL STEEL 


WESTERN IRON WORKS 
141-147 BEALE STREET 
132-148 MAIN STRELT 


San Francisco Phone DAvenport 2575 


REPUBLIC STEEL 


CORPORATION 


RE 


Manufacturers of 
ENDURO Stainless Steel; ТОМ. 
CAN Copper Molybdenum Iron 
Sheets and Pipe; and Steel Pipe, 
Sheets and Reinforcing Bar for 

every building purpose. 
Write for informatian 


Rialto Building, San Francisco, Calif. 
First Май, Bank Bldg.. Los Angeles 
Smith Tower Building, Seattle, Wash. 


| р 
JU LB HNS ied eu ER ON 


For use in Commercial and 


Industrial Buildings, Apart- 


ment Houses and Homes. 


@ 
$. T. Johnson Co. 


Main Office and Factory 
910-950 Arlington St., Oakland 


MacDonald & Kahn 


General “ 
Contractors 


CNO 


Financial Center Bldg. 
405 Montgomery St. 


San Francisco 


The Architect and Engincer, October, 1932 


о = 


uem СЕРР ^ 


ТНЕ 


ARCHITECT 
AND 


ENGINEER 


NOVEMBER 1932 


пем 
а $ 
tomorrow 


Anticipating an ever-increasing demand for the new and the modern, 
Otis has experimented with metals and alloys to develop unusual 
design and color in elevator ornamentation. Many of these new de- 
signs are now standard equipment. But to make the range of ele- 
vator finishes still wider and leave the choice of ornamentation 
entirely within the realm of the architect, Otis is also prepared to 
execute any special design or finish that the architect may wish. 
That is why many of the elevators which are being installed today 
will not only give highly satisfactory service. They will also add ap- 


preciably to the inside finish of the building itself. 


OIIS 


ELEVATOR COMPANY 


3 3 OFFICES THROUGH- 
OUT THE WORLD 


ТНЕ 


VOLUME 111 
NUMBER 2 


ARCHITECT 


NOVEMBER 
1932 


AND ENGINEER 


FREDERICK W. JONES, Editor 
EDGAR М. KIERULFF, 4372. Editor 


Contributing Editors 
CLARENCE R. WARD, San Francisco 


CARLETON MONROE WINSLOW, 
Los Angeles 


HAROLD W. DOTY, Portlond, Ore. 
CHAS. H. ALDEN, Seattle, Wash. 


Consulting and Advisory Editors 
J. HARRY BLOHME 
LEWIS Р. HOBART 
TIMOTHY L. PFLUEGER 
ELMER GREY 
CLARENCE A. TANTAU 
WM. L. WOOLLETT 
JOHN J. DONOVAN 
JOHN BAKEWELL, JR. 
EDWIN L. SNYDER 
THOMAS J. KENT 
ALBERT F. ROLLER 
J. STEWART FAIRWEATHER 
JOHN W. GREGG 
EMERSON KNIGHT 
CHAS. H. CHENEY 
W. ADRIAN 
JULIAN C. MESIC 
H. J. BRUNNIER 
L Н. NISHKIAN 


Cover Picture 


Frontispiece 
11 


43 


12-46 


49 
Бора и 2 
бе в 2 
e жох 
59072 v 
65 


71 


Q5his ©0755 ие 


THE SAN FRANCISCO OPERA HOUSE 
From a Photograph by Shaw 


OPERA HOUSE, SAN FRANCISCO, FROM WINDOW OF CITY HALL 
Photo by Maulin 


THE SAN FRANCISCO WAR MEMORIAL GROUP 
B. J. S. Сай, A 1A., with an appreciation by Charles Warren Perry 


STRUCTURAL FEATURES OF ТНЕ SAN FRANCISCO OPERA HOUSE 
Christopher H. Snyder, C. E. 


THE ACOUSTICS OF THE SAN FRANCISCO OPERA HOUSE 
Clifford Melville Swan, Acoustical Enginecr 


OPERA HOUSE STAGE LARGEST IN AMERICA 

Dariel Fitzkee 

MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT OF THE WAR MEMORIAL GROUP 
William E. Leland, M. Е. 


VICISSITUDES OF A YOUNG ARCHITECT 
Elmer Grey, FALA. 


GENUINENESS IN BUILDING 
Thaddeus Jay, Architect 


AIR CONDITIONING AT 
S. К. Dows 


FACTORY PRODUCED FRAMELESS STEEL HOUSE 


BUILDING SURVEY AND FORECAST OF THE ELEVEN 
WESTERN STATES 


ARCHITECTURE AND FINANCE-TAX THE SURPLUS 
William L. Woollett, Architect 


WITH THE ARCHITECTS 


PLATES AND ILLUSTRATIONS 

THE WAR MEMORIAL GROUP. CIVIC CENTER, SAN FRANCISCO 
.. . OPERA HOUSE ... VETERANS’ BUILDING ... FEDERAL 
OFFICE BUILDING 

Arthur Brown, Jr., Architect; С. Albert Lansburgh, 

Collaborating Architect an the Opera Hause 

ELMER GREY, F.A.LA. 

SKETCH OF SUMMER HOME OF ELMER GREY, ARCHITECT 


RESIDENCE OF CHESTER WURSTER, LOS ANGELES 
Henry Carleton Newton and Robert Dennis Murray, Architects 


HOOVER DAM ETCHING BY WM. WOOLLETT 


RESIDENCE OF MR. WHITE, POINT LOMA, CALIFORNIA 
Lincoln Rogers, Architect 

RESIDENCE OF MR. AND MRS. MARTIN WHITE, SAN DIEGO 
William Н. Wheeler, Architect 


AN ALL ELECTRIC KITCHEN ON WHEELS 


ONGext Month 


THE recent work of Н. A. Minton, promised for the November issue, will 
he shown in December, the postponement being due to the completion of the 
San Francisco War Memorial Group which is featured in the current issue. 


A GLANCE 


The second installment of Elmer Grey's series of reminiscences, “Тһе 
Vicissitudes of the Young Architect", will be of particular interest to the 
younger practitioners of architecture. 


Published monthly by THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER, INC. 
1662 Russ Building, San Francisco, California 


W.J. L. KIERULFE, President and Manager 


FRED'K. W. JONES, Vice-President 


L. B. PENHORWOOD, Secretary 


WILLIAM W. BRADFORD, Advertising Manager 


New York Representativc—The Spencer Young Company, 299 Madison Ave., New York City 


Subscriptions—United States and Pan-American, $4.00 a year; single copy, $ .60. Canada and foreign countries, $6.00 a year. 


Photo by Moulin 


OPERA HOUSE FROM WINDOW OF CITY HALL, 
SAN FRANCISCO 


ARTHUR BROWN, JR., ARCHITECT; С. ALBERT LANSBURGH, 
COLLABORATING ARCHITECT ON THE OPERA HOUSE 


ТНЕ 
ARCHITECT 
AND ENGINEER 


NOVEMBER 1932 
VOLUME 111 
NUMBER TWO 


THE SAN FRANCISCO WAR MEMORIAL 


GROUP 


by 
po. САНА 


Ң have been asked to characterize the new Opera House in а paragraph—1 wish that 
I had the power! Still, though Mr. Cahill in the article which follows, contributes far 
more than I can to this fine subject, I am tempted to lay my laurels beside his. Now that 
the great labor is done, above this babble of acoustics and incredible equipment that is 
ringing in our ears, beyond the provisions for our creature comfort, beyond even the deco- 
rative treatment of this element or that surface, let me as another architect pay my tribute 
to the fabric as a whole—to the building itself—for in its conception and realization is 
bound up the essential genius of my fellow craftsmen. Direct, commodious and lovely, it 
admirably serves its public and its purpose. All praise to those who out of con[usion 


brought thus order and beauty! 


—Warren Charles Perry. 


Director of the School of Architecture, University of California, Berkeley. 


А YEAR ago the 


writer described in these columns with en- 
thusiasm and admiration a new theater and 
it may be argued that it must be difficult if 
not impossible to write of the new Opera 
House in the same vein seeing that the two 
structures are diametrically different in de- 
sign, the former being an emphatic reac- 
tion and repudiation of all the traditions 
and spirit of the latter. The two buildings 
are whole poles apart. Аз an example of 
architectural design the Paramount The- 
ater in Oakland and the Opera House in 
San Francisco have absolutely nothing in 
common except that they are both dedi- 
cated to the purpose of public entertain- 


ment in drama and music, separately or 
combined. 

Very many, perhaps the majority of 
people, will praise and appreciate both 
creations with equal zest. Why therefore, 
the thoughtful reader may ask, if extremes 
can meet in a common appreciation, why 
cannot similar dirversities in other fields 
than art, he comprehended and appreci- 
ated by one person. Since Art is a human 
product in spite of its range, any human 
being should understand its protean moods 
and sympathize with all of them. And, to 
go further, why not include patriotism, 
politics and even religion? 

The critic of the fine arts who can show 
that schools of utter divergence merely 
express different moods, modes or fash- 


4: р 


ions, developed by different races at differ- 
ent periods, which are yet all human, is 
working towards the larger comprehen- 
sion which should and will lead finally to 
a universal or divine tolerance in all things: 
international understanding, economic 
world order, perpetual peace and then—in 
some far distant day, the Millennium! 


The Opera House with the War Mem- 
orial and Federal Building herewith illus- 
trated are, of course, parts of the Civic 
Center. The architecture throughout is 
best described as Classic because this great 
style with all its elements of the Greek and 
Roman orders welded together during the 
Italian Renaissance represents the great 
permanent body of architectural doctrine, 
the keynotes of which are Order, Author- 
ity and Universality. It is architecture 
itself; entrenched, systematized, catholic 
and everlasting. 


Other styles, revolts, protests come and 
go. Some flourish and remain, like Byzan- 
tine, Romanesque, Gothic and Saracenic. 
But the Classic remains, and after each 
revolt or reaction gathers itself into new 
solidarity and strength. It is the static 


perpetual force of permanence as against 
the dynamic and occasional force of revo- 
lution, seen in all the work of Nature and 


Mankind alike. 


PLAN OF FIRST FLOOR, OPERA HOUSE, 
SAN FRANCISCO 


А striking parallel occurs if we consider 
Rome as its headquarters and Latin its 
dialect. 


It is curious to note the schisms and re- 
volts from the central power in War, Re- 
ligion and Architecture and as we shall see, 
even Grand Opera! 


First Rome conquers the Germanic tribes 
to the North who a few centuries later 
advance South and in turn conquer their 
conquerors and sack their city! Since Rome 
epitomized civilization all outer tribes were 
termed barbarians. Conservatism always 
thus describes its critics—schismatics, pro- 
testers and revolutionaries. When Roman 
architecture became Romanesque and by 
the Northern conquerors was then adopted 
and transformed to the great Ecclesiastical 
Style it was still the architecture of a 
whilom barbaric people and although de- 
veloped by the Franks it was named in 
derision and contempt after these barbar- 
ians. 


After the fall of the Roman Empire the 
secular dominance of Pagan Rome gave 
place to the spiritual dominance of Papal 
Rome, aut gladio aut cruce, if not by the 
Sword, then by the Cross! Yet to show 
that the long line of revolts and schisms 
continued to expand and that none the less 
the Central Power did not dissolve and 
did not disappear it is most curious to note 
that when Papal Rome was at the very 
zenith of its power throughout the whole 
of Western Europe, that is during the 13th 
Century, the original “barbaric” architec- 
ture or Gothic was also at its greatest glory 
and perfection so that spiritual Rome and 
the art development of Rome's greatest 
enemy were now so thoroughly united that 
they are practically one, and the architec- 
ture named from the old time Goths who 
sacked and burned the very homes of 
Pagan Rome now housed the congrega- 
tions of Papal Rome! 


But more revolts are to follow a few 
centuries later led by the Germans again, 
when Luther turned most of Northern 
Europe once more against Rome's spiritual 
sway and, most remarkable to note, at the 
very same time, the Renaissance in Papal 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 12 = NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Italy was once more restoring to suprem- 
acy the Art and Architecture of Pagan 
Italy! The Palladian-Vignola style, as we 
may reasonably call it. a few centuries later 
was again revitalized by the Ecole des 
Beaux Arts and magnificently exemplified 
in Charles Garnier s masterpiece, the Grand 
Opera. And this, let it be known in the 
identical area, the Isle de France, where 
Gothic Architecture was invented and most 
gloriously expressed at Rheims, Rouen. 
Amiens, Beauvais. 


Directly from this influence came the 
classic revival in the United States in the 
Boston Library, straight from St. Gene- 
vieve in Paris, and the initiative of McKim, 
Meade and White culminating in the great- 
est full sized models of Classic Architec- 
ture ever beheld in the modern world, the 
Chicago Exhibition of 1893. 


Following the apparition of these won- 
derful buildings of Chicago's Dream City, 
by far the most memorable feature of the 
Exposition, the trend of American Archi- 
tecture has been Franco-Roman, especially 
as the official style for public buildings, the 
reconstruction of Washington along the 
lines originally laid out by L'Enfant and in 
the various groups of buildings in most 
large cities where “Civic Centers" are 
being established. 


And these groups of buildings, unlike 
the transient dreams of the Chicago Fair, 
will be realized in steel and stone and not 
in staff and stucco. 


And now let the reader note the whirli- 
gig of time, for again the Germanic revolt 
like Banquo's ghost, stalks across the 
placid scene of classic complacence. This 
new apparition of protest takes form in the 
very city where the glory of Rome was so 
magnificently envisaged but forty years 
before. 


The World Exposition to be opened next 
year in Chicago will be utterly at variance 
with every tenet and doctrine, practice and 
detail of the Classic spirit. All historical 
form will be "bad form" and the "Orders" 
wil be out of order. The "protest" will 
again be Germanic since, as a matter of 
fact it is Berlin that, in recent years, has 


abandoned the Classic and set the pace for 
a new Architecture built with rude and 
rugged honesty and sometimes sheer ugli- 
ness on continuous concrete surfaces and 
not, as of old, on "discrete" blocks of 
stone. For, since the arch developed Roman 
architecture out of Greek, the vault made 
Gothic architecture out of Romanesque, 
and as the Renaissance emergence of secu- 
lar needs displacing religious ones devel- 
oped modern Classic, so it is not impossible 
that the all plastic qualities of concrete 
clothing a skeleton of steel may really lead 
to a new abiding and beautiful style. 


At any rate we have seen in these pages 
that both methods have their value and to 
appreciate one type is not to condemn the 
other. And this principle—the equal tol- 
erance and open acceptance of opposites in 
Architecture now possible and actually 
established in the modern mind is really a 
remarkable advance in thought. We no 
longer take violent sides. The Classicist 
does not repudiate the innovator. The pio- 
neer along new lines still respects the dis- 
cipline and school training of the "regular 
thing’, as Montgomery Schuyler used to 
call it. How welcome the thought that this 
established tolerance in architecture could 
be extended to other fields. Only when 
violent partisanship is abolished will the 
world ever come fully to its senses. And 


Ti. iE 25002 PLAN | 
УТРА “0475 „ 


PLAN OF MEZZANINE FLOOR, OPERA 


HOUSE, SAN FRANCISCO 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 13 p NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


if this brief homily suggested by the Para- 
mount Theatre in Oakland and the Chi- 


cago Fair of next year, contrasted with 
the New Opera, the Civic Center and the 
Fair of forty years ago is worth some ser- 
ious thought this preamble may be more 
pertinent than it first appears to be. It is 
noticeable that this static Italian-born style 


Photo by Sturtevant 


dominating the 18th Century - and - after 
world of music culminated in the German 
revolt of Richard Wagner. He showed up 
the absurdities, the insincerities and the 
frivolities of the Italian Opera just as surely 
as Ruskin had so eloquently pointed out 
the similar deficiencies and defects of the 
Italian Renaissance in architecture. An 


OPERA HOUSE AND VETERANS’ BUILDING, WAR MEMORIAL GROUP, 
SAN FRANCISCO 


Arthur Brown, Jr., Architect; G. Albert Lansburgh, Collaborating Architect on the Opera House 


of styles calls for less comment and discus- 
sion than any architecture of dynamic pro- 
test or revolt, just as an earthquake or a 
revolution makes news while normal tran- 
quility does not. 

An opera and symphony theater in a 
modern city differs in some respects from 
similar structures of a generation or so ago, 
and this for the reason that in music we 
see again a repetition of the same conflict 
we have been describing with precisely the 
same national or racial line up. 

Italian Opera as the entrenched system 


apostle of Schopenhauer the philosopher 
of will power, Wagner so masterfully im- 
pressed the world with his reforms that 
Italian Opera seemed doomed forever, or 
left to survive merely as а fashionable 
diversion unworthy to rank as the Art of 
a serious and sincere people. Henceforth 
the Beyreuth theater was to set up a new 
epoch where "the poetry of Shakespeare 
wedded to the music of Beethoven”, as 
Wagner so modestly described his own 
output, was to dominate the world. Did not 
the Ninth Symphony foreshadow this with 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER Е | 14 » NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


its recitatives and chorus? Had not this 
epochal work overstepped the threshold of 
impersonal music into the field of personal 
drama? 

But, just as Luther's Revolt from Rome, 
while starting new styles of worship, none 
the less resulted in so powerful a reaction 
of Mother Church (whose practice he pro- 


cance is that both schools were represented 
and equally applauded and appreciated by 
the public, and this would also be the case 
in Philadelphia or Cincinnati where the 
proportion of the schools of Opera in the 
program might well be reversed. 

It is pertinent to note the ever recurring 
vitality of the Italian genius which has 


Photo by Sturtevant 


REAR VIEW OF OPERA HOUSE, SHOWING STAGE PAVILION; CITY HALL 
IN CENTER AND VETERANS' BUILDING ON THE LEFT 


Arthur Brown, Jr., Architect; С. Albert Lansburgh, Collaborating Architect on the Opera House 


tested) that it is now in the world of relig- 
ion, again as strong and universal as ever. 
Just so has Italian music itself rebounded 
from Wagner's influence and finally sur- 
rounded and almost submerged it. Wag- 
пег'ѕ innovating influence is waning and 
modern Italian Opera is stronger than ever. 
The program of the New Opera plainly 
shows it. Eight Italian Operas, including 
Faust, wholly Italian in spirit though a 
German theme by a Frenchman; two Wag- 
ner music dramas and one other German, 
though Italian in treatment. The signifi- 


come to the foreground and leadership in 
the world four times in three thousand 
years of history, a record unparalleled by 
any other race. Well may Rome be called 
the Eternal City, and significant is the fact 
that the greatest award of the Beaux Arts 
is the Grand Prize of Rome, where its most 
brilliant pupils are sent to complete their 
studies. 

To return to the Opera House; some- 
thing of the Wagnerian reforms have т- 
fluenced its design, either consciously or 
unconsciously, or perhaps because all 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ж 15 » NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


HShOH үяяао H.L NO LOALIHOYY ONILVHOSVTIOO 

'HOWDSSNVT ТЯНАЛУ о LLOSLIHOWV “чі 'NANO?S SDH.LHV 
ООСІЗМУЧЯ NYS 

“АПОЧӘ TVIRIOWSIN AYM "HSDOH VilddO SHBIHTIVO 
аму мпичолапу HONOYHL NOLLOYS TYWNIGNLIONOT 


ISNA УЗАЙ 


<= Е === АИ 


У 


= 
EY 


ye 7 


^na 7m 


2-ib is] 
im, joi Jot 


MC 


15-4 


г В 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER я 16 » NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


ЧЯ5ПОН VHdO AHL NO .ILOSLIHONV ƏNILYUOQYTIOD 
'HOWDSSNV'I Ічяялу ‘о :LOSLIHOUV “Ul 'NAAO?S. ANH.LAV 


OOSIONV?H NYS dnOD 'IVIHIOWHN AYM HSDOH VilddO AO 
HOVNAWOUd LNAWASVd ПМУ YdAOd HOTIOHHIL NOLLOAS 


477114 T E г : a 
. | 3€YNsACTa Тизиземо ф 7310; КЕНІ Ж011510 1VNIQALIDNOT . 


rd NT ARTT 


= 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ET] 17 » NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


) Т! In ТП 
TA ІШІШ 
val 


416 И 


"is 
| 


т 


ЇЇ 


Ц 


| ИС 


(ШШ! 


пе 


ini S 
‚| МН, 
28 eo 


VAN NESS AVENUE ELEVATION, OPERA HOUSE, WAR MEMORIAL GROUP, 
CIVIC CENTER, SAN FRANCISCO 


Arthur Brown, Jr., Architect; G. Albert Lansburgh, Collaborating Architect on the Opera House 


opera houses have responded more or less 
to the Wagnerian reformation. 


These changes consist in the curtailment 
of the splendiferous grand foyer and the 
staircase de luxe where the audience were 
wont to convene and to see a parade of 
bemedaled magnificoes and their bediam- 
onded grand dames like very mundane 
angles on a Jacob's ladder ascending and 
descending in the very real heaven of their 
dreams. 


Instead there is a reasonable foyer for 
the general public and an intimate and quite 
delightful special foyer on the mezzanine 
with stairway connection for the exclusive 
service of both stalls and boxes. The 

parading of clothes and jewelry so objected 
to by Wagner is here limited. In the same 
spirit the side boxes where occupants find 
that being seen by the rest of the audience 

was a more enjoyable thing than watching 
the performance, a practice not so difficult 
to understand in people to whom opera 
going is a habit and a social diversion, “(о 


see and be seen”; a custom to which the 
very technique of the old opera deliber- 
ately played up to. For did it not include 
some scenic spectacles and the inevitable 
ballet for the groundlings and the front 
row, long recitatives so that people could 
chat in their boxes on the side, an occa- 
sional aria by the prima donna or other star 
who stepped out to the front, got a mom- 
ents real attention and did their brilliant 
bit of virtuosity? 


Another Wagnerian innovation partly 
complied with is the disappearing orches- 
tra. Wagner contended that the gesticula- 
tions of the conductor together with the 
sawing of the bow strings produced a visual 
distraction not to be tolerated. In this con- 
nection in some cases probably Wagner 
was wrong. for many a long tedious reci- 
tation of his Norse demi-gods might have 
easily bored the audience but for the fun 
of watching the baton waving of the con- 
ductor or the amusing antics of the man at 
the tympani and cymbals. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 18 [ NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


To the depression of the orchestra fifteen 
feet below the stage is added another fea- 
ture connected with the elevation of the 
stage so that strips of the floor about four 
feet wide can be raised to any height form- 
ing a grand flight of steps to accommodate 
a great symphony orchestra or the mem- 
bers of a huge chorus and for many other 
spectacular purposes. The stage сап, fur- 
thermore, be built out towards the front 
two whole rows of seats on certain spe- 
cial occasions for scenic spectacles of extra 
special magnitude. 


Another feature of this Opera Ноизе 
which may be considered a result of the 
Beyreuth experiment is the extreme sim- 
plicity of the decorations and wall treat- 
ment. 


The interior details suggest outdoor 
rather than indoor design, which is not a 
bad idea. The general holding color is a 
very soft chamois leather tone picked out 
with gold, the curtain being of rich gold 
brocatelle and the seats and backs of all 
fateuils throughout a pleasing cherry red. 


А highly decorated and gorgeous the- 
ater would distract attention of the audi- 
ence who should be like disembodied spirits 
with only eyes for the actors and ears for 
the music. 


Along these lines the great simplicity and 
austere restraint of this charming and rest- 
ful interior is well in accord with the teach- 
ing of the reformer of Italian Opera, who 
avoided even the very word "Opera" and 
its supposedly artificial and frivolous con- 
notations. 


It will be noted that on the side walls 
where in the old time horse-shoe plans, the 
boxes were placed, are here set instead 
three well recessed window openings. 
nicely subordinated to the central proscen- 
ium. These are filled with an octagonal 
and square tracery of stone, backed by a 
wire screen and draped in front with the 
same fabric as the stage curtain. These 
grilled apertures will serve to mask the 
organ pipes when they are installed. 


The curtailment of the spectacular grand 
foyer with a purely practical stairway sys- 
tem at each end permits of course the space 


thus saved to be added to the stage giving 
that great depth so necessary in a theater 
to serve many varied purposes and to allow 
sufficient outside foreground for both 
Opera House and War Memorial on both 
the Van Ness and Franklin Street front- 
ages, and, be it not forgotten, to bring the 
cost within the appropriation. 


The Doric severity of the front foyer 
with its coffered and vaulted ceiling, the 
same octagonal arabesque of the organ 
screen inside, is indeed a most admirable 
composition of pure Classic restraint and 
perfect proportion both as a practical dis- 
tributing area or clearing house of the gen- 
eral circulation and as an architectural 
overture to the entertainment within. 


On the other hand, one feels a bit dis- 
appointed in the far ends of this admirable 
inner vestibule which carries the eye across 
the side corridors of distribution to decid- 
edly stark looking staircases. If this is a 
protest and a rebuke to the extravagant 
grandiloquence of the Parisian model. it 
would seem that the recoil goes a little too 
far. Perhaps some easily adjusted drapes 
might give these vistas what the public 
likes in plays, a happy ending. 


There is no doubt but what the planning 
of a complete Opera House with all its re- 
quirements is the most difficult and comp- 
licated problem the architect has to deal 
with. It is not our province or purpose to 
go into these details at this time. The sight 
lines, seating, acoustics, lighting and circu- 
lation of this structure have already been 
tested and found to be without fault or 
flaw. The efficiency of such a structure can- 
not be determined by any inspection of blue 
prints. In a double sense it is not the plan 
but the performance that counts. 


The outer architectural envelope of this 
Opera Building when duly arrived it, de- 
fined also the form of its own twin counter- 
part across the line of Fulton Street, known 
as the War Memorial, with the major dif- 
ference that the great scenery loft of the 
Opera naturally demanded a tall vertical 
pavilion at the rear, not duplicated in the 
Memorial; as well as minor variations in 
the fenestration and of course a different 
interior. Yet, by reason of a central audi- 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 19 » NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


torium something of a general kinship per- 
sists in the two structures. 


The first proposed plan of October, 
1899, to improve the City of San Francisco 
and establish a great group of monumental 
buildings at the City Hall, (the central fea- 
ture of which, by the way, was an Opera 
House) was conceived and made public on 
a full page of the " Examiner" for October 
8, 1899. 


The second plan, the present Civic Cen- 
ter as finally adopted was made in 1904, 
revised and published in THE ARCHITECT 
AND ENGINEER for July, 1909 and again in 
the September issue of 1918. 


It is gratifying to see the final comple- 
tion of the Civic Center is practically in the 
very competent hands of the architect who 
has, so far, contributed much to its fulfill- 
ment. That part of Fulton Street which 
opens up the approach from Market Street 
will have on its right the Federal Building, 
herewith illustrated, extending from Hyde 
Street to the Library at Leavenworth. 


On the opposite side, (a gore block) and 
at the backs of other buildings facing on 
Market Street, a space has been provided 
twenty feet from the street line on which 
may be built a monumental facade replica 
of the opposite Federal Building, either as 
independent extensions of the adjacent 
buildings or perhaps an enclosed arcade for 
some rentable purpose not yet exactly 
determined. This will provide the monu- 
mental approach to the Civic Center. 

Much of the same sort of thing was done 
in Paris on the Rue de Rivoli, where, from 
the Place de la Concorde one sees the 
Madeline hrough a short arcaded avenue, 
on either side. 


There remains but one building opposite 
the Library towards Market Street, where 
at one time the Opera was to go. This will, 
in all probability be a Law Building to 
house courtrooms, library, offices, etc., 


drawn from other overcrowded buildings, 
notably the City Hall. 

One more building and a facade is then 
all that remains to complete the whole 
scheme, with the exception of four small 
buildings to fill out the picture at the cor- 
ners of the big Central Plaza. 


And then should follow, when times 
warrant, the widening of Fulton Street half 
a block on each side to Ash and Birch Ave- 
nues, the parking of the 320 foot Boulevard 
which the writer originally (1904) chris- 
tened "Ashfulton Avenue" as far as 
Steiner Street, thence through a cutting 
across Alamo Square and diagonally three 
blocks to Broderick to meet the Panhandle 
extended one block West. 


This would improve a cheap and dreary 
section, make a beautiful drive, furnish at 
least two new monument sites and supply 
the city with a complete conflagration baf- 
fler from the Ferry Building to the Ocean. 


Property is cheap in this section and the 
raised values on Grove and McAllister 
Streets should more than pay for the park 
making and provide a profitable, much 
needed improvement to relieve unemploy- 
ment, since most of the work would be 
wrecking, digging, hauling and other un- 
skilled forms of labor. 


А bond issue for this purpose wou!d be 
valuable to capital and labor, both of which 
are just now desperately in need of em- 
plovment. 


With the one exception of Washington. 
D. C. our Civic Center, so matetially ad- 
vanced with the completion of the Opera 
and War Memorial, will, without doubt 
when fully carried out, form the most ex- 
tensive, complete and magnificent group of 
monumental structures on this continent if 
not, as the Duke of Connaught said when 
passing through San Francisco some years 
ago, ‘the finest thing of its kind in the 
world". 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E" 20 > NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Photo by Sturtevont 


OPERA HOUSE, WAR MEMORIAL GROUP IN CIVIC CENTER, 
SAN FRANCISCO 


ARTHUR BROWN, JR., ARCHITECT; G. ALBERT LANSBURGH, 
COLLABORATING ARCHITECT ON THE OPERA HOUSE 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E ат » NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


DETAILS OF FACADE, OPERA HOUSE, WAR MEMORIAL GROUP 
IN CIVIC CENTER, SAN FRANCISCO 


ARTHUR BROWN, JR., ARCHITECT; С. ALBERT LANSBURGH, 
COLLABORATING ARCHITECT ON THE OPERA HOUSE 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER | 23 4 NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


STAGE ЕМТВАМСЕ TO THE OPERA HOUSE, WAR MEMORIAL 
GROUP IN CIVIC CENTER, SAN FRANCISCO 


ARTHUR BROWN, JR., ARCHITECT; С. ALBERT LANSBURGH, 
COLLABORATING ARCHITECT ON THE OPERA HOUSE 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 25 р> NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


D 
машы 


= = — — 


Architectural recut stone by MiGrucr & Со. DETAIL, FOYER OF THE OPERA HOUSE, WAR MEMORIAL 
GROUP IN CIVIC CENTER, SAN ERANCISCO 


ARTHUR BROWN, ]В., ARCHITECT; С. ALBERT LANSBURGH, 
COLLABORATING ARCHITECT ON THE OPERA HOUSE 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 29 72 NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


FOYER OF THE OPERA HOUSE, WAR MEMORIAL GROUP IN 
CIVIC CENTER, SAN FRANCISCO 


ARTHUR BROWN, JR., ARCHITECT; G. ALBERT LANSBURGH, 
COLLABORATING ARCHITECT ON THE OPERA HOUSE 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 3] | NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


NIGHT VIEW ОЕ LOGGIA, OPERA HOUSE, WAR MEMORIAL 
GROUP IN CIVIC CENTER, SAN FRANCISCO 


ARTHUR BROWN, JR.. ARCHITECT; G. ALBERT LANSBURGH, 
COLLABORATING ARCHITECT ON THE OPERA HOUSE 


AUDITORIUM OF OPERA HOUSE. SHOWING BOXES AND 
ORGAN SCREEN, WAR MEMORIAL GROUP, SAN FRANCISCO 


ARTHUR BROWN, JR., ARCHITECT; С. ALBERT LANSBURGH, 
COLLABORATING ARCHITECT ON THE OPERA HOUSE 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER <q 37 ғ NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


мин 


_ M 


BALCONY END OF AUDITORIUM, OPERA HOUSE. WAR 
MEMORIAL GROUP IN CIVIC CENTER, SAN FRANCISCO 


ARTHUR BROWN, ]®., ARCHITECT; С. ALBERT LANSBURGH, 
COLLABORATING ARCHITECT ON THE OPERA HOUSE 


II — 


#НЧМОМЯ TVANLONALS ‘чнадм$‘н чннаоляано 


ODSIONV?HH NYS ‘ASNOH УЧНао ‘NOILONYLSNOD 
ЧО HdAL АМО>ЛУЯ ANY ХОЯ ЭМІМОНЅ 'SNV'Id TVEN.LONALLS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER 4 42 » NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


STRUCTURAL FEATURES OF THE SAN 
FRANCISCO OPERA HOUSE 


Na FRANCISCO'S 
new Municipal Opera House is built of 
the conventional Class A Type, with full 
steel frame and short span floor construc- 
tion. Every effort was made to make the 
structure a worthy companion to the other 
buildings in the Civic Center. Owing, how- 
ever, to various considerations, architec- 
tural, theatrical, etc., and to site condi- 
tions, there are some features of the design 
which are out of the ordinary. 


The building rests upon a deep layer 
of what is commonly known as bank sand 
and ground water is at times well above 
the basement floor level. In order to keep 
out the ground water, and due to wide 
spacing of columns, it was decided to ге- 
sist the water pressure by a thick layer of 
concrete. This concrete was about 1 to 10 
and designed for density to resist the pass- 
age of water. This concrete reached its 
maximum thickness under the stage at 816 
feet. The thinnest holding down slab was 
17-0” and as the column footings had been 
poured earlier the water was prevented 
from flowing in the junction of the two 
pours by 16 oz. copper baffles. Upon this 
slab was placed gravel about two feet 
thick, and on this, in turn, was placed the 
six inch basement slab. Various pipes were 
laid in the gravel as required by the 
mechanical engineer; also drains for taking 
care of any ground water seepage. There 
has been little if any seepage so far. 


Box and balcony construction differs 
from the usual in that there are no balcony 
girders, the cantilevers being parallel to 
the axis and supported directly by steel 


by 
Christopher H. Snyder, С. E. 


columns. Їп general the cantilevers are 
made of deep rolled beams rather than 
trusses. These beams in turn support the 
usual type of concrete balcony steps. (See 
Fig. 1, sheet S-14. 


The stage is interesting on account of 
its size and unusual amount of equipment. 
The stage floor clear of columns is 72’x126’. 


At 39' above stage floor are the first fly 
galleries, projecting out from each side 
25’. Three additional fly galleries, all the 
same size, are on each side, one above the 
other, the highest being 102' above the 
stage. Above these is the usual gridiron, 
116' above the stage, and above this at 125' 
another gridiron. Cat-walks connect the 
upper fly galleries. The fly galleries are 
supported by plate girders of 72' span and 
are reached by passenger elevators from 
the stage floor, one on each side. 


The stage block is insulated from the 
balance of the building by concrete walls, 
as is also the auditorium, and the steel 
work is protected by concrete fireproofing. 


In addition to the fire walls above re- 


ferred to the steel work is thoroughly 


braced against lateral forces. Granite col- 
umns have steel column cores as part of 
the steel frame. To further stiffen the 
building as a whole the terra cotta exter- 
ior walls are backed with reinforced con- 
crete, poured against the terra cotta. 


Most careful precautions were taken 
against fire hazards and lateral forces. 


The building contains about 6,000,000 
cubic feet. Some 3800 tons of structural 
steel were required for its construction, or 
about 1.28 Ibs. рег cubic foot of building. 


4^5» 


THE ACOUSTICS OF THE SAN FRANCISCO 


OPERA HOUSE 


І М designing a theater 


or hall for the production and audition of 
music, attention must be directed primarily 
to its shape if the acoustical condition is to 
prove satisfactory. This means careful 
consideration, not only of the general arch- 
itectural style, but more particularly of the 
dimensions, the distribution of the audi- 
ence, and the contour of the reflecting sur- 
faces of walls and ceiling. If these details 
are worked out with sufficient care, and if 
furnishings of suitable sound - absorbing 
qualities are chosen, it is usually not neces- 
sary to resort to any artificial surface treat- 
ment with commercial acoustical materials. 


In fact, if this fundamental question of 
design is not adequately taken care of, no 
amount of subsequent medicinal applica- 
tions will ever produce a wholly satisfac- 
tory result. One readily calls to mind many 
disappointing auditoriums which no amount 
of expense has been able to remedy, and 
which can never be corrected except by 
the radical surgical treatment of re-design 
and rebuilding. А generation ago, it was 
thought that only sheer luck could be 
counted on to produce favorable results, 
and even today that idea is all too common, 
including the archaic and wholly useless 
nostrum of stringing wires. Science and 
experience during the past thirty years 
have taught us to know better, and have 
shown that it is amply possible to predeter- 
mine the effect of any given design and to 
reject those forms which will prove hurtful. 

The secret of the success of the new 


War Memorial Opera House in San Fran- 
cisco lies in the fact that the planning of 
the auditorium was the result of careful 
study for weeks and months by the archi- 
tects and their engineers. Numerous pre- 
liminary sketches were made, considered, 


by 
CLIFFORD M. SWAN 


Consulting Acoustical Engineer 


and rejected on account of factors which 
would have injured the desired acoustical 
results. 

Some were thrown out on account of 
concave curved surfaces which would have 
produced focussing of sound and resultant 
echoes; others on account of excessive 
height or width which would unduly in- 
crease the reverberation and cause de- 
layed and interfering first reflections; and 
still others on account of deep and low 
overhanging balconies which would have 
made difficult the penetration of sound 
waves to the back of these recesses. 

The design finally chosen was such as 
to eliminate or reduce to a minimum all of 
these difficulties; while at the same time 
there were provided sufficient hard rellect- 
ing surfaces of proper extent, contour and 
location to re-enforce the direct sound 
waves and produce sufficient loudness for 
comfortable hearing even in the most re- 
mote parts of the house. 

The degree of reverberation was calcul- 
ated, and adjusted to its optimum value for 
an auditorium of this size and character by 
means of the heavy absorbent furnishings 
and the disturbed absorption of the audi- 
ence. 

The acoustical result in the completed 
building is in full accord with the theoretic- 
ally computed and predicted condition. The 
reverberation or time of decay of individ- 
ual sounds is reduced by the absorptive 
materials to a degree which eliminates 
undue overlapping or blurring of succes- 
sive tones, and yet does not so far absorb 
the delicate overtones of the instruments or 
voices as to injure the quality of these 
sources. The reduction of loudness in far 
parts of the auditorium caused by the pres- 
ence of the absorbing materials necessary 
to diminish the reverberation is offset by 


re-enforcing the sound of the direct wave 
[Concluded on Page 59] 


4 1+: р 


OPERA HOUSE STAGE LARGEST 


IN AMERICA 


E es it may be said 


in all conscientiousness that the stage of 
the Opera House of the San Francisco 
War Memorial is one of the world master- 
pieces of stage engineering. Often the term 
has been used extravagantly in praise of 
some less worthy subject, but here used in 
just comment our words seem to fall far 
short of adequate. 

The proscenium, picture frame of the 
stage, is one of the largest used for oper- 
atic purposes, limited as it must be through 
acoustical restriction to the seating capac- 
ity. From the soffit to the stage floor it 
is approximately fifty feet and the side to 
side measurement is fifty-two feet. 

Behind the proscenium the gridiron leaps 
to the dizzy height of one hundred and 
sixteen feet —almost twelve stories between 
floor and ceiling! Wall to wall the meas- 
urement is approximately one hundred and 
thirty-five feet, while the backwall is about 
ninety feet from the proscenium. 

Closing the arch is an asbestos and steel 
lire curtain, electrically operated, weighing 
about ten tons. This has all improved fea- 
tures along the lines of automatic releases, 
checks and the like. 

Perhaps from the audience viewpoint the 
feature of the stage is the front curtain. 
Unlike most curtains of its kind it has the 
facility of draping itself in any desired 
shape or design at any desired speed. The 
material for this curtain is a speciallv de- 
signed gold brocatelle woven for the Opera 
House by the Orinoka Mills. In fact, this 
material has been used throughout the stage 
for permanent draperies, and is also fea- 
tured in the large arches in the auditorium. 


by 
DARIEL Г ЕЕЕ 


The front curtain operates from ап 
all-electrical device called the opera drape, 
so named because its first use anywhere 
is on the stage of this opera house. The 
mechanism consists of a battery of motors 
with remote control limit switches and 
speed controls, all of which may be preset 
and operated at the touch of a button. 

Installed in the stage floor are four elec- 
tric bridges, four feet wide and extending 
the full width of the proscenium opening. 
These will descend eleven feet below the 
stage and eight feet above. Running in 
tracks beneath the floors on either side of 
the stage are panels to slip into place when 
the bridges are below. These are called 
scroto sliders, and they too move electric- 
ally. 

Immediately back of the bridges are five 
rows of manually operated traps, which 
will reach a height of seventeen feet. T'here 
are twenty-nine of these. 

With the bridges and traps it is possible 
to devise steps, platforms, terraces, hills 
and a great number of other forms without 
difficulty. Also, it is possible to set the 
properties and furniture for a subsequent 
scene beneath the stage and bring them 
into place when needed. 

There is built into the stage also a steam 
curtain and a great number of connections 
and facilities for water and smoke effects. 

Beneath the stage there is a gauze truss 
weighing almost two tons, making it pos- 
sible to present spectacular scenic effects. 
particularly those in the Wagnerian operas, 
requiring the blending of one scene into an- 
other. 

The tormentors and grand drapery are 
supported by steel bridges, acting as light 
bridges. Ап auxiliary spotlight bridge 


«ob 


hangs immediately above the grand drap- 
ery bridge. 

There are in all eight border lights, all 
of which are supported by light bridges and 
the last of which carry a huge battery of 
1000 watt flood lights for illuminating the 
eighty-five foot high silver sky cyclorama. 

'There are 104 sets of steel cable lines 
[ог operating the various scenes, many of 
which are operated by motors. 

The lighting equipment is one of the 
most elaborate in the world. All of it is 
operated from the tremendous switchboard 
thirty-nine feet long which incorporates 
the latest features in pre-selective remote 
control. 

The footlights may be automatically 
brought into view or dropped into the stage. 

One of the features of the lighting equip- 
ment is the new German double cloud ef- 
fect machines, conceded to be the most 
realistic effect machines of its kind ever 
conceived. The entire lighting equipment 
was devised by Robert L. St. John with 
Chas. Holzmueller consulting. 

Complete facilities for the manufacture 


e 


ol scenery, lighting equipment and cos- 
tumes are provided in fully equipped work- 
rooms, and shops. Scores of dressing rooms 
[or musicians, singers, dancers, and prin- 
cipals are located on both sides and be- 
neath the stage. In addition there are ге- 
hearsal rooms, libraries, offices and studios 
for all heads of the various departments. 

Credit should be given A. Wagstaff for 
his assiduous and capable work in coor- 
dinating the ideas gathered by the archi- 
tects from the best technical men in the 
country and putting into working condition 
such a complete stage mechanism that al- 
ready has proven its flexibility and ade- 
quateness. 

The stage equipment, including all stage 
draperies, but exclusive of elevators and 
traps, was manufactured by the Stage 
Equipment Studios of San Francisco, Fred 
E. Turner, manager. The writer directed 
the manufacture and installation of this 
equipment. 

The stage bridges and traps were manu- 
factured and installed by Elevator Supplies 
of New York City. 


e Er. т". Тек, CLA MI MIN PS mmm 


T стт 


FEDERAL OFFICE BUILDING, CIVIC CENTER, SAN FRANCISCO 
Arthur Brown, Jr., Architect 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 46 = NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT OF WAR 


MEMORIAL GROUP 


[ HE boiler room 


is located in the west end of the basement 
of the Veterans' Building, and here steam 
is generated for the entire heating and ven- 
tilating requirements of both the Opera 
House and Veterans’ Building. The boiler 
plant consists of three 150 horse power low 
pressure welded steel boilers, and one 25 
horse power boiler of the same type for the 
supply of steam to the hot water tanks only. 
The boilers were originally intended to be 
operated with oil fuel, and the oil tank and 
piping were installed. Later it was decided 
to use gas for fuel and the oil burning 
equipment was replaced by natural gas 
burners of the vertical tube type. 


All piping for the supply of the Opera 
House is run through an underground 
tunnel between the boiler room and the 
sub-basement under the stage. 


There is no mechanical equipment in the 
Opera House except the heating and ven- 
tilating apparatus and the pressure tanks 
for the sprinkler equipment of both build- 
ings. 

The heating and ventilating plant for 
the Opera House consists of about 35 sep- 
arate motor driven supply and exhaust 
units, grouped in four fan rooms, two in the 
basement and two on the fourth floor level, 
all of this equipment being symmetrical 
about the longitudinal center line of the 
building. The auditorium is heated and 
ventilated by a supply and exhaust system 
of the upward type, with plenum chambers 
under the main floor, under the dress circle 
and under the balcony, and exhaust screens 


by 
Wm. E. LELAND, M. E. 


in the ceiling at the rear of the orchestra, 
in the box vestibules and at the rear of the 
dress circle and the balcony. There is also 
supply and exhaust in the lobby at the rear 
of the boxes. 

There are six supply fans for the audi- 
torium, handling a total of 100,000 C.F.M. 
and four exhaust fans handling a total of 
94,000 C.F.M. or about 30 cubic feet per 
minute for each seat. 

The main lobby, foyer and all side lob- 
bies are provided with a fresh air supply of 
40,000 C.F.M. handled by two fans in 
basement fan rooms and a total exhaust of 
28,000 C.F.M. handled by two fans in 
attic fan rooms. 

АП of the basement rooms have supply 
and exhaust with two separate fans for 
each; and the dressing rooms, and other 
similar rooms above stage level, are also 
ventilated by two supply and exhaust fans. 

There are four toilet exhaust fans, two 
for the toilets in the front of the house and 
two for the toilets in stage portion of the 
building. 

Separate supply and exhaust ventilating 
fans have been provided for the board 
room, chorus room, projection room, broad- 
casting room and the main light fixture, 
where mechanical ventilation is necessary 
on account of the large amount of heat gen- 
erated by the lamps in this fixture. À ven- 
tilating fan is also provided for the drop 
storage room in the stage basement to keep 
the scenery stored therein from deteriora- 
tion. 

The stage area and all dressing rooms 
adjoining are heated with direct radiation, 
the radiation in most of the dressing rooms 


«cob 


being located behind screens. The stage 
radiators (23 in number and containing a 
total of 2,743 square feet) are located near 
rear wall on stage level, on sides of stage 
and on each side of arch about 20 feet 
above stage level. 

The entire equipment is Johnson Service 
under thermostatic control with separate 
control on each side of auditorium and on 
each seating level, so that it is possible 
when heat is required, to deliver air at dif- 
ferent temperatures to the orchestra, dress 
circle and balcony. All of the lobbies and 
side corridors are likewise under thermo- 
static control. 

All of the ventilating fan units are under 
remote control from a small switchboard on 
stage near the main stage board and on 
this board are also located 3-way valves 
operating master steam valves for each of 
the fan type heating units. thereby giving 
perfect control of all the heating and venti- 
lating equipment from the stage. 


The entire fresh air supply is filtered 
through sectional type dry filters, one filter 
unit being used for the entire air supply to 
each basement fan room and a separate 
filter for each supply fan in the case of the 
attic fan rooms. 


The main entrance lobby on the Van 
Ness Avenue side is provided with hot air 
supply entering on each side of the entrance 
doors, and the corresponding exhaust is on 
each side of the doors leading into audi- 
torium from the main foyer. 


A complete mechanical vacuum cleaning 
system is installed, with the machine locat- 
ed in one of the basement fan rooms. 

The equipment for the Veterans’ Build- 
ing consists of direct radiation for the деп- 
eral offices, and mechanical supply and ex- 
haust ventilation for the meeting rooms, 
auditorium, galleries, etc. 

The main vestibule and trophy gallery is 
provided with a recirculating supply and 
exhaust system handled with a single fan, 
the supply being delivered at the main en- 
trance doors of the lobby and the recircu- 
lation taken from the trophy gallery. 

A single supply fan and an exhaust fan 
supply heat and ventilation for all of the 
meeting rooms on second and third floors, 


each room having a thermostatically con- 
trolled aerofin heating unit in the branch 
supply duct in attic. There are no direct 
radiators in any of these rooms, and a por- 
tion of the exhaust air from each room is 
taken from the small kitchen service rooms, 
thereby maintaining a suction in these 
rooms at all times. 

The auditorium in this building is pro- 
vided with a separate supply fan of 27,000 
C.F.M. capacity and an exhaust fan of 
25,000 C.F.M. capacity. 

Owng to the fact that the auditorium 
floor is movable and mushrooms in the floor 
were impossible, a downward system of 
ventilation was designed with the supply 
air admitted through the main ceiling and 
deflected horizontally to prevent down- 
ward air currents, and the exhaust is re- 
moved through screens in the side walls 
near the floor, and through mushrooms 
under the seats in the balcony. 


The art galleries on fourth floor have a 
separate supply and exhaust system of 
41,000 and 28,800 C.F.M. respectively 
with separate fan type heaters for each gal- 
lery. 

The boiler room, general basement, pro- 
jection rooms, etc., each have their own 
supply and exhaust fan and the general 
toilets have separate exhaust fans. 


The Veterans’ Building has a total of 21 
fan units. 


A complete automatic system of Johnson 
temperature control is installed in both 
buildings. 

An automatic sprinkler system has been 
installed for the stages in both buildings 
and the rooms directly pertaining thereto, 
and for the general basement in the Vet- 
erans’ Building, all supplied from pressure 
tanks in the Opera House. 

A chilled drinking water system serves 
all of the drinking fountains in both build- 
ings and is operated by a refrigerating 
machine of the CO2 type and of nearly 
four tons capacity. 

The basement supply fan and the meet- 
ing rooms supply fan are provided with a 
Radi-lon air purifying equipment. 

The elevator installation in both build- 
ings is the Spencer-Westinghouse type. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER < 48 > NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


VICISSITUDES OF А YOUNG ARCHITECT 


К the hope that 


some of the experiences in connection with 
my early architectural practice and the 
events that followed may be of interest, 
and that an account of the one major pit- 
fall into which I fell with a thump may 
serve to prevent others of like constitution 
and proclivities from encountering it, I 
write these memoirs. 


It must have been in about my twenty- 
eighth year that I opened an office in Mil- 
waukee. The epoch marking event fright- 
ened me. І had shortly before built a sum- 
mer home for myself at Fox Point, a newly 
opened resort outside of Milwaukee, and 
it had taken all my available cash. So the 
idea of discarding a salary and starting out 
on my own initiative was terrifying. But 
the move was forced upon me by circum- 
stances over which I had no control, so 
there was nothing to do but venture. 1 did 
not realize at the time that the spirit of 
enterprise within each of us and our own 
initiative when well chosen, sometimes 
bring rewards far beyond anything we may 
have hoped for them. 


I had one job to start with, but what I 
was to do if others did not promptly follow 
worried me. The offices of my late employ- 
ers were on the second floor of a three story 
building which had no elevator and I suc- 
ceeded in getting some tailors who were 
on the third floor to move out and let me 
have their quarters. The idea was that if 
I did not continue to be busy I could then 
the more handily fall back upon doing 
work at odd times for my former employ- 
ers. 


Anxiety, was, however, entirely unneces- 
sary. Part of the success which followed 
was due to the fact that my late employers 


by 
ЕШЛЕРШЕРЕУ RALA 


Eimer Grey, Architect 


had generously allowed the character of 
my work to become known before I left 
them. But that did not account for it all. 
My summer home had seemed like a senti- 
mental, almost a foolish venture at the time 
it was undertaken. I was unmarried and 
for practical purposes did not require it. I 
built it because I could not resist the magic 
of its marvelous site. But the ways of Fate 
are devious and often kind, and what then 
seemed almost like a creature of youthful 


4» 


ТТ 
[| 
ІІ 
М 
Se) 


yd ОМИ: 
САЗ BE 
: 


~ E 
v 


| LEES 
778 mn 
Pa i 
| ЛЕ i 
А ГӨ. ey 
Г о. 


eB) or i 


N 


N 
N NY 


= 
М 


ai 
} 


UTI Y 


ео іле entes 


отте Residence Fo My Bhor Grey Architect 
Рок "Pot, ws. 


PEN SKETCH OF SUMMER HOME OF ELMER GREY, FOX POINT, WISCONSIN 


Elmer Grey, Architect 


folly now turned out to be a veritable 
bonanza! 


The house was situated on the edge of a 
bluff overlooking Lake Michigan. Below 
was a beautiful strip of meadow land with 
spreading elms scattered about and hedges 
intersecting that had been planted long 
ago. During the summer hay was gathered 
in these meadows, crows sounded their 
plaintive notes through the still air, and 
birds added melody. Beyond on the lake 
steamers and sailing craft plied slowly by. 


Due largely to this marvelous situation, 
and also to the fact that the district was 
fast becoming a fashionable resort, the 
house made a great hit. It was published 
widely in magazines, was reproduced in 
color as an advertisement for building 
material, was the cause of my elevation to 
Fellowship in the American Institute of 
Architects, and last but not least brought 
me much additional work. 


Customers passed the door of my former 
employers and climbed another flight of 
stairs to patronize me. They even paid me 
a higher commission for the privilege! I 


would not have had the nerve to ask it per- 
haps had not fortuitous circumstances come 
to my aid. I had long maintained while 
working as a draftsman that 5% was not 
enough to charge for residence work, that 
it required more time and hence should re- 
ceive higher compensation. Now the op- 
portunity came to put the idea in practice. 
I had two clients who had come to me at 
the same time to have summer homes 
planned. They did not at first ask my 
rates, but after we had gotten well under 
way one of them remarked, "Grey, Mari- 
ner and I came to you in a rather unbusi- 
nesslike way by not asking your commis- 


= m 
HY, 4 
ЖЕТІ 

V Weir. те" 
Б ЖЫ» Ba ne 


Fram the Take 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER - 50 » NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


sion, but I presume that for work of this 
character it is somewhat more than the 
usual rates!" It certainly was!—and with 
such encouragement it has continued to be 
ever since! 


Му very first commission was even more 
remarkable. The client was a coal mer- 
chant and after finishing his house [ went 
up to call one evening. This was before 1 
had raised my rates above 576. His wife 
and | were seated in the living room and 
he was pacing the floor in front of us as 
though he had something on his mind. Sud- 
denly he stopped and said, "Grey, my wife 
and | are much pleased with this house 
but we feel that you made one mistake." 
I inquired what it was. “Well,” he said, 
"we don't think you charged us enough! 
2... We have talked it over and have de- 
cided that we don't want to live here year 
after year and feel that anyone who has 
had as much to do with it as you have was 
underpaid. We want to give you $150 in 
addition to your fee." 


I thanked him. 


He continued, "But I want to give it to 
you in a way which I will not feel so much 
myself; so if you don't mind, I will send 
you $50 worth of winter coal tomorrow, 
and for the balance give you stock in my 
company." I told him that whichever way 
he wanted to do it would be quite satis- 
factory to me. 


He never gave me any paper represent- 
ing the stock in his company and as the 
months rolled by I had almost forgotten 
about it. Then one day he came in, walking 
rapidly. his eyes snapping and slapping me 
on the back exclaimed excitedly, "Grey. 
Ive just sold out to a trust." I replied 
rather casually, "Is that so." "Yes, that's 
so," he continued, "and you'd better perk 
up because it affects you.” "How so?" I 
asked. "Do you remember one time my 
giving you $100 worth of stock in my com- 
pany?” “Yes.” “Well, I sold that stock 
with the rest, and your share amounts to 
$216. Here's your check!" 


Following the above mentioned commis- 
sion came several other jobs and [ was ap- 
parently headed under full steam toward 


a brilliant and successful future. But all 
the time insidious influences were marking 
me for certain failure! I am unable now 
to be sure just what they all were, but I 
do know that along with several compan- 
ions [ supposed that very strenuous ехег- 
cise in a gymnasium on top of mental work 
every day was a good thing. It may be for 
born athletes of stolid temperament and 
more rugged constitution; but I was born 
not so much for athletics as aesthetics, and 
probably needed more diverting recreation 
and milder physical exercise in the open 
air. А{ any rate without being conscious 
of it my health was slowly but surely being 
undermined. 


Finally, I was given the commission to 
plan a good sized Christian Science church. 
The plans were just finished when my 
health broke down completely. My clients 
strove to help me, but I felt that I must get 
away from my work entirely and took a 
night train for Florida. 


To make a short story of what then hap- 
pened to my Milwaukee practice—my of- 
fices there have never been seen by me 
since! 


The second installment of Mr. Grey's 


interesting portragal of the "Vicissi- 
tudes of a Young Architect" will ap- 
pear in the December number о} 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 51 ж NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


RESIDENCE OF CHESTER WURSTER, LOS ANGELES 
Henry C. Newton and Robert D. Murray, Architects 


ca 


Der 2 
| Шис 


ылуу AL 


Second FLOOR PLAN 


PLANS, RESIDENCE OF MR. AND MRS. 
CHESTER WURSTER, LOS ANGELES 
Tia 31 Таса Puan 


Henry Carleton Newton and Robert Dennis Murray, Architects 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ж 52 » NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


GENUINENESS IN BUILDING 


AL PRECEDING 


article dwelt upon the sentimental aspect 
of building with materials that endure. 
The present argument is for truth and hon- 
esty in building. 

The frame and stucco house, in the de- 
sign and building of which, an appearance 
of great solidity is carried out in walls 
which might be pierced by a hat pin, is 
losing its popularity as we turn to the 
more honest practice of frankly expressing, 
in form, line, texture and color, the mate- 
rials with which we build. 

Most of us would prefer to be straight- 
forward and sincere in our designing, but 
we know that our conscientious scruples 
would lead us to take up the gage of battle 
for our principles and break the long per- 
iod of Architectural Peace. Also, it is nec- 
essary to admit that the stucco house is 
more cheery to look upon than our shingled 
house of twenty-five years ago. It роз- 
sesses other practical advantages too, and, 
in spite of our wood built traditions, a 
deeper appeal is made by masonry forms 
than by those of wood. So we are led to 
the mimicry of masonry in order to de- 
light ourselves with the appearance of 
solidity and durability at the compara- 
tively low cost of wood construction and 
we wink at the deception involved as we 
realize the latitude of design permitted by 
what is little better than stage craft con- 
struction. 

However, honesty of purpose need not 
be sacrificed even in the adaptation of 
forms and lines taken from other materials 
than those of which we build, as our own 
Colonial wood architecture can bear wit- 
ness, where masonry forms are adapted to 
the material (wood) in which they are ex- 
ecuted. The whimsical recall of a sturdier 
architecture is made without claiming for 
it a quality which it does not possess. These 


by 
THADDEUS JOY 
Architect 


Colonial houses are sincerely and honestly 
wooden in character, 

Our shingled houses of twenty-five or 
шоге years ago expressed genuinely their 
character, while in New York City and 
its environs the little old Dutch houses 
stand for what they are. A number of 
Dutch houses of wood are to be seen at 
intervals along the Neck Road in Graves- 
end. 


There is a little house of white painted 
wood which stands in pleasing contrast to 
its nondescript neighbors on Russell Street, 
a few doors to the eastward of College 
Avenue in Berkeley, and, although its de- 
sign is based on French tradition, it is 
well suited to our Berkeley soil and climate. 
The house looks into a secluded garden 
court which is enclosed on the street front 
by a garage and a studio separated by a 
deep archway leading into the court. The 
source of its inspiration is a masonary type, 
and the details are of wood in imitation ol 
its prototype, but the house is obviously 
wood. Мо attempt to deceive here; only 
the adoption of forms peculiar to another 
material in captivating simulation of a type 
which the architect, Mr. Wurster evi- 
dently loved; a practice followed in much 
of the noblest architecture of all time. 


The types referred to open a road to an 
extensive field for economical building suit- 
able to all parts of our country, and, if we 
wish to go “modern”, the field is no more 
limited in extent. 


The cry of today is to express in your 
design the materials which you use. Let 
your building be genuine. Be honest without 
being narrow. If we wish to recall forms 
and details of other materials for reasons 
of sentiment may we not do so without 
shame, providing the product does not at- 
tempt to deceive, but proclaims itself for 
what it is? Let us take pride in our choice 
of material and glorify its limitations. 


<; р» 


^ 
Шы» f 


А і. 24 2 ез 
"ULL. m eR ; „> 
4i ПІ Ди». 3 жы, 


"3 П ІШІ j чы > e 2 Ж | c 
M. Шы Wee РЕ 7777 
"REL x 7 жын 


cw Lal 


M 


M 
157 ^ч, 
тей 
А Whe 
Er. RS 
us 


HOOVER DAM SERIES—FLOOD SCENE AT MOUTH OF 
PORTALS NOS. 2 AND 3 


BY WM. WOOLLETT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 54 =. NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


AIR CONDITIONING AT A GLANCE 


The subject of air conditioning which is 
receiving so much attention just now is 
clothed in more mystery than warranted. 
Stripped of its outer garments of fine yarns 
we see just this—a control of temperature 
and humidity in properly circulated clean 
ай! 

Psychrometric charts, designed for the 
weather man, are full of data based on wet 
bulb and dry bulb readings. The engineer 
or architect, when writing specifications, is 
not interested in these things. He knows 
that the prevailing temperature which he 
must correct is a certain high or low figure. 
He knows that the weather bureau reports 
indicate certain data on relative humidity. 
With this information he sets about the job 
of designing and specifying. 

The appended chart is a simple and 
direct solution of the problem and it is a 
problem which every person in the heating 
game, building game, or profession of engi- 
neering generally will have thrust at him 
during the coming year. 


А ates engineers will 


gladly tell us all we care to know about 
equipment once we have decided what the 
problem consists of. Sales data will not 
always tell us clearly whether or not we 
must humidify or de-humidify the air and 
on that question hinges the distinction be- 
tween the two great classes of air condi- 
tioning equipment. 

The appended graph was developed to 
make the problem more obvious to the un- 
initiated and to make the solution more 
direct to the architect or engineer. Condi- 
tioned air is that which has been cleaned, 
and brought to a condition of temperature 


by 
S. R. DOWS 


and relative humidity which lies within the 
"comfort zone". Unfortunately, tempera- 
ture and humidity are very elusive when 
considered simultaneously, since any 


Жегетіе Humpty 


H Е: Ж ЗДЫ e 4 
peces с АЕК i 
f улок: ZONE), EW PON 
H А n AL " А Тығ бике «Т Tam. 
Day Bua Tm nennt 
oÉ ra. fen E 
сн AT с. 
Serum Quer \ 
Foe Бир Fire 


СЕЕ: 


EN. 


қада! 
tee 17 1 P , 
. c 1 


ER C SE 1 3 
—— Egone 
bo PC. Ия. % 
= - А IEAI E mus Era Eoen = 5 Е 
E егі BR see. 
fIGISTURE — GRAINS Per Cu Fi 


ДОШ В 
d LL STURE а 

CHART GIVING SOLUTION OF AIR CONDI- 

TIONING PROBLEM PREPARED BY BY S. В. DOWS 


change in temperature effects a coincident 


change in humidity. Psychrometric charts 
were developed for the weather man rather 
than the air conditioner, hence they are 
cumbersome. The graph here presented is 
a direct solution of the problem at hand. 


The use of the graph is illustrated by a 
simile problem. Assume a temperature of 
90 deg. and relative humidity of 10%. Cool 
this air to 70 deg. and we see from the 
graph that the relative humidity will then 
be nearly 2096 which is helpful but the 
comfort zone is at 40%. The moisture in 


*«»» 


the assumed air is 1.5 grains рег cubic foot. 
The moisture at 70 deg. and 4076 humidity 
is 3 grains and we must therefore add 1.5 
grains of moisture per cubic foot of air 
which requires a humidifier. That is your 
specification and the salesman will gladly 
produce such a unit for you. 

Now let us see what the condition would 
be if the 90 deg. temperature were accom- 
panied by a relative humidity of 40%. Re- 
ducing the temperature to 70 deg. we find 
a humidity of 8076 which is of course op- 
pressive. We must therefore de-humidi]y 
by (a) absorbing nearly 3 grains of mois- 
ture from each cubic foot of air, or (b) 
refrigeration in which we lower the temp- 
erature of the air below the "dew point" 
and thus precipitate the excess moisture 
which will collect on the cooling unit in the 
form of frost. The desired quantity of 
moisture for 70 deg. and 40% humidity is 
roughly 3 grains per cubic foot. 'The "dew 
point" corresponding to 3 grains is 41 deg. 


and hence the refrigerating unit must be 
capable of lowering the air temperature to 
this low point. When the moisture has been 
removed, we must re-heat the air to the 
70 deg. desired, so a heater must be in- 
cluded in the equipment. 

This graph may be used in many ways 
when determining the specifications for a 
job. The architect or engineer must edu- 
cate the client and the manufacturers sim- 
ultaneously if he wishes to produce the de- 
sign which he knows is best. With this 
graph as a tool, air conditioning is brought 
immediately to its essentials. 

No attempt has been made here to dis- 
cuss the relative merits of comfort zones. 
'The most recent authorities seem to agree 
on the location as here represented. А solu- 
tion may compromise in regions closely ap- 
proximating the zone here shown without 
any fear of injury. However, the ideal lies 
within this region and should be closely 
adhered to. 


RESIDENCE OF MR. WHITE, POINT LOMA, CALIFORNIA 
Lincoln Rogers, Architect 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER < 56 > NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


ENGI 
CONSTR 


NEERING 


UCTION 


FACTORY PRODUCED FRAMELESS 


STEEL HOUSE 


7 \ FRAMELESS steel 


house which may ultimately point the way 
to cheaper and better homes is now near- 
ing completion in Solon, Ohio, a Cleveland 
suburb. Engineers who have visited the 
house believe that the new frameless 
method of construction is a marked ad- 
vance toward the factory production of 
low-cost homes. As the weight of the 
structure is carried by the walls, the erec- 
tion of the conventional structural frame is 
unnecessary. 


For centuries, houses have been built 
largely by hand. Materials are hauled to 
the building site in small units; men erect 
the house piece by piece from a multitude 
of small parts; there is much cutting and 
fitting; there are delays while one contrac- 
tor waits on another. Even with the most 
skilled and conscientious workmen, waste 
abounds. The Department of Commerce 
estimates that 53% of the cost of building 
a house is wasted. Builders say it is the 
fault of the piece-meal system, and not the 
individual. 


It is admitted that at least half of our 
population is improperly housed. Of our 
30 million families, more than 15 million 
are renters chiefly because of the high cost 
of home building. On the average, the home 
owner spends 10% of his anticipated life's 
income for a home, exclusive of mainten- 


ance, interest, and taxes. А large major- 
ity of the 15 million families who pay rent 
to landlords have an income of less than 
$2000 per year. They cannot afford to own 
a home. 


During the past twenty years the cost of 
dwellings has mounted, while the cost of 
most factory produced articles has consist- 
ently declined. Consider, for example, the 
automobile. The $500 car of today is bet- 
ter than the $1000 car of five years ago. 
The modern auto represents the best ef- 
forts of great technical staffs, extensive 
research laboratories, and efficient produc- 
tion. In contrast to the modern car, the 
average house is far more costly. 


А large part of the frameless steel house 
is factory produced. There is no waste, 
nor field cutting nor fitting. The walls are 
made of 20 gage Armco steel sheets. 
Box-like corrugations, or channels, two 
inches deep by six inches wide, were 
pressed lengthwise in the sheets to give 
them strength and rigidity. After forming, 
these wall sheets are of four different 
standard widths. This provides a certain 
amount of flexibility in width adjustment 
when assembling walls. Further adjust- 
ment may be secured by telescoping the 
channels, in which case a hollow column is 
formed in the wall, providing extra 
strength. 

The walls were assembled in large sec- 
tions, room wide and story high, with win- 


«v» 


dow ог door frames in place. The welding 
of the various pieces in a section is quickly 
done. The welds are approximately 34" 
long, spaced about 12" apart, and require 
on the average five seconds time per weld. 
The completed wall weighs slightly more 
than two pounds per square foot. They 
were hauled to the job like stage scenery. 


The floors are of 18 gage Armco steel. 
The individual floor sheets are formed 
longitudinally in the shape of a long “Z”. 
These are lapped one over the other and 
welded together, forming a series of metal 
boxes which, though light in weight, pos- 
sess great strength. 


In erecting the house, the lower floor 
was completed first. Then the first story 
walls were set in place and welded to a 
foundation cap and the floor. The second 
floor was next completed, followed by the 
second story walls, the roof, and the para- 
pet walls. As it was erected a floor at a 
time, no scaffolding nor extension ladders 
were necessary. The union of the steel 
floors and walls, which is accomplished by 
arc welding, gives the structure exceptional 
rigidity and strength. Only one welding 
outfit and two workmen were employed on 
the erection work. Seventeen tons of steel 
were required to form the “chassis”. 


The exterior of the house is heavily in- 
sulated against heat or cold, and is cov- 
ered with porcelain enameled shingles. It 


will never require painting, and a bath with 
the garden hose will quickly restore its 
original luster. Other exteriors such as 
stucco or brick may be applied. 


The interior of the wall will be finished 
with gypsum lath, on which two coats of 
plaster will be applied. The completed 
wall is less than four inches in thickness. 


The ceiling will be finished with an 
acoustical tile cemented to the lower plane 
of the steel floor above which serves as a 
plaster base for the room below. 


Laminated hardwood floors will be laid 
in the living quarters, while linoleum will 
be used in the kitchen and bath. These are 
fastened to the floor with an asphaltic 
mastic which serves as a sound deadener, 
a leveler, and an adhesive. 


A four ply asphaltic roof will be applied 
over an insulating slab 2 inches in thick- 
ness. As the roof will also be the porch, 
thin pieces of slate will be imbedded in the 
asphalt to provide a walking surface. 


Another interesting feature of this un- 
usual house is the absence of screen doors. 
The glass in the exterior doors is operated 
with a crank like an automobile window. 
There is a roll screen in the top rail which 
is fastened to the upper edge of the glass. 
As the glass is lowered to ventilate the in- 
terior, the screen rolls down and prevents 
the entrance of insects. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 58 > NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


On the roof a small solarium is located, 
and the remainder of the roof area fur- 
nishes a safe playground for small chil- 
dren, away from the dangers of automobile 
traffic. In the winter, the roof can be 
flooded and used as a skating rink. 


The house is highly fire resistant. It con- 
tains no combustible material except the 
wood floors and furnishings. Moreover, it 
13 rat and vermin proof, there being no 
place for rodents or insects to harbor. 


A large percentage of the population is 
afflicted with an inherent fear of lightning. 
The frameless steel house is lightning 
proof. If struck with a bolt of lightning no 
harm would be done, as the house is in 
itself a conductor of electricity and damage 
from lightning occurs only where resist- 
ance is encountered. 


Nor will radio reception be interfered 
with. An outside aerial will be used, with 
a lead cable leading into the house. 

As steel is not subject to shrinkage, the 
usual cracking of plaster is eliminated. 

This demonstration of the adaptability 
of sheet metal to low cost home construc- 
tion is not aimed at producing a standard- 
ized house, but to perfect a new method of 
construction which can be used to repro- 
duce almost any type of architecture. In 
the future the home owner may buy his 
house somewhat in the same manner as he 
selects his car today. At present, the home 
is too well entrenched in sentiment and tra- 
dition to attempt anything so revolutionary, 
and America would probably resent a 
movement to standardize houses. The In- 
sulated Steel Company's method is so flex- 
ible it can be utilized to factory-produce the 
individual house. The architect can make 


his drawings according to the owner's de- 
sires, deliver his plans to the house factory, 
and supervise the work, as he does at 
present, with far less waste and inconven- 
ience. If there is a demand for standard- 
ized houses, it can be used for that purpose. 
It is adaptable to the construction of apart- 
ment buildings up to four stories high. 

Nor does the house under construction 
attempt to solve an aesthetic problem. 
What represents architectural beauty and 
splendid arrangement in the mind of one 
person may be repulsive to another. Beauty 
is judged by individual standards. The 
flat roof was selected because of its econ- 
omy. It may be replaced with a gable roof 
at an additional cost. 

The first edition of the frameless steel 
house contains seven rooms, two baths, 
and a double garage. There is a large rec- 
reation room, a boiler room and laundry, 
and other storage rooms in the basement. 
Produced without the aid of any specially 
designed machinery or handling equip- 
ment, and erected by workmen unskilled 
in the new technique, its cost is compar- 
able to frame construction. Through the 
experience gained in its erection, many new 
ideas have been developed which will still 
further reduce housing costs and improve 
and simplify home construction. It will soon 
be possible to complete a home of average 
size in а few days time. 

The new frameless steel method of con- 
struction was developed by Mills G. Clark, 
former president of the Cleveland Real 
Estate Board. The house illustrated is 
being constructed by the Insulated Steel 
Company of Cleveland in cooperation with 
the American Rolling Mill Company of 
Middletown, Ohio. 


OPERA HOUSE ACOUSTICS 


by reflections from hard interior surfaces 
so located that the path difference between 
the direct and reflected waves is not suffi- 
cient to cause interference. As already 
noted, the contours and mutual relations of 
all reflecting surfaces are so chosen as not 
to cause distinct focussing or echoes. In 
this way, the three major problems of arch- 


(Continued from Page 44) 


itectural acoustics, namely, intensity, rever- 
beration and echo, have been taken care of. 
The result has been to produce an auditor- 
ium in which there is well balanced distri- 
bution of sound throughout the entire 
house, with perfect clearness and distinct- 
ness, and without loss of quality. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER <q 59 » NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


BUILDING SURVEY & FORECAST 


Pacifie Coast Totals of Present and Prospective Building 
For the Balance of 193: 


— [| automotive | Apartment | Avartment | manna | ee | Сюзтшшну LM ы | A 
California........ 29 471,920] 143  8,688,570].................-.---—.-. 59,300] 20 3,386,000] 34 7,280,000] 55 2,555,500] 559 4,801,100] 72 1,960,000 22 2,585,60 
Arizona...... 3 ҰРДЫҢ атаана 8 150,950 1 57,50 
Colorado........... 1 88,000) 16 IST ASO еее 2 42,500 oan 
І4аһо.... 2 13,850 3 ен Ш 16.000: 1 26,500 
Montana.......... 1 14,000] 1 130,000 2. hc Rete 4 115,750] КО Ош 
Хеуайа............. m DRDO у ш о сы Ди ееси ка кинни тикин ы КЕККЕ ое 1 30. 00. 
New Mexico... | 2 20,000] 1 ООО EEA E О ООО Sie nee eene 4 90,5001. 
Oregon.............. 9 Nn 23 2,835,300 286,000] 48 5 117,500 1 56,00 
Шав 1 $0,000 6 ОООО ect] т о ЕРИСИ 138,000] 27 3 68,500]. 
Washington... 14 765,500] 17 990,000 5 1,200,000 716,000] 133 ИП a P zm 3 190,00 
Wyoming......... —— | 23 152,000 1 21,500 еее. 


66 1,573,270] 213 14,143,570] 11 1,763,000] 7 279,300] 35 3,730,500] 41 7,994,000| 101 4,527,500|897 7,424,750] 112 2,888,700| 27 2,888,10 


Total projects reported by 511 Architects and Contractors—$189,551,325 to be spent оп 
2,355 present and prospective INEW buildings. 


Pacific Coast Totals of Present and Prospective Modernizing Et 
For the Balance of 1932 


California........ 31,300] 55 140,00 


Arizona............ 22800| т :92500] ее. № 30,0001 8,500] 20 

Colorado.. -{ 1 à 60,000 4 135,000]... ene 102,000 

Idaho E 5000... ар а 1200г ПП | ааа 
Мо апа ее d а а Seago SOS, О Боза ыс Бешка 

INevada тм E 222. Becca бе е а ның кесек ы ү ынаан а EE ЭЧ... у, 

К ее со ее аға П О Сосо е 106000 3 3,875] 1 /4,500...................... 
CV ОП сс Шс зс A ИИ Reeser 2. 

Шан ccr a e E 10,000] 1 —(——————  —— H— 6 17,000] № E essem 
Washington..... 3000 esl 20.0001 4,000 


14 397,500| 39 412,260 18 156,300 600,025] 18 149,30 


Bold faced figures denote number of jobs. 


Total projects reported by 511 Architects and Contractors— 58,497,925 to be spent on 614 pres- 
ent and prospective modernizing jobs. A grand total of 2,969 projects aggregating $198,049,250. 


Note—The greater part of these schedules are immediately authorized and construction will proceed 
within the period covered on the balance. This also applies to the projects for modernizing, 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 60 [> NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


f the ELEVEN WESTERN STATES 


rojects as Reported Бу 511 Architects and Contractors 
мі to July 1, 1933 


Office 
Buildings 


Public 
Buildings 


Welfarc 
Buildings 


Stores Retail 
and Dept. 


Schools and 
Colleges 


Hospitals and 
Institutions 


Hotels Industrial Theaters Transportation] Miscellaneous 


9,225,700] 38 7,947,000 92 20,273,600] 168 2,743,480] 23 3,484,000 


10 МЕА = 89,000 


8 720,000 380,800 


8,830 


1 50,000, 


85,815 


повин А ecoute Бы p o eee ET чоп Las. они рои T ы 


85,000]...... 


[S] 


2 ЕИ Етан 6 93,500 


AS OSO OU а 11,900 


2,876,000 


1 260,000 19 293.000 136,200 


125,000]... 1 645,000 9 152,500] 1 20,000]... 


E] 618,000] 3 235,000) 


208,500 750,000] 15 1,526,000) 22 397,000) 


13,256,700| 61 9,720,000] 87 7,250,350] 61 13,266,780| 59 13,046,300| 128 24,141,600 


ling Projects as Reported by 511 Architects and Contractors 
мі to July ], 1933 


321,000] 8 130,000] 8 104,000] 13 103,500 6 117,500] 82 120,200] 23 SERIEN sicco 1 75,0001 29 499,000 

1 4,000 2 SRU Gonn соз erectae 1 3.00001 6 6 18.500 

160,000 .-... 3 | 21,000] 5 10,000 5,000] 10 6 30,500 
Ре 1 Бр ЕНСІЗ erts [IE] 4 5,300 
42,000) Й — 5 2 7.300 
аена 3 1 3,450 

censos ose бно сн 3 300,000] 6 1 2,300 
33,300] 1 TTR SOU ecce end каулы 102,500] 11 9 31,000 
11,000] 1 68,000] 2 И м SEE кк О E E ааа ЕН аас анаа елка анына а адын) 5 16,400 
29,000| 3 5,700] 2 30,000] 3 222,000 16 200,000 Ито c cnp 8 20,300 
p BSL] era 3 1 3,900 


596,300] 14 307,700| 24 220,650| 21 635,500 528,000] 145 1,110,350] 21 398,000] 1 1000 1 15:000 72 638,450 


These figures have been checked with the survey recently completed by 

THE AMERICAN ARCHITECT, and data of the U. $. Department of 

Commerce and the result clearly indicates them to be conservative. 
se figures are exclusive of all Federal work except that which has been given to private Architects in the area. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ^ 61 > NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


ARCHITECTURE AND FINANCE —TAX 


THE SURPLUS 


[Concluded from the September and October Numbers] 


І. private life, the 


average home owner in times of idleness 
"fixes up the garden" metamorphically 
speaking. When the old man has a day 
off, he prunes the fig tree, mows the lawn 
and tidies up generally. Civilization as a 
whole should do likewise — in time of 
draught, dig the well; in time of panic, dig 
up savings and water the garden of un- 
employment. 


If we required beautiful surroundings 
for everybody, if beauty were a necessity, 
we would have a natural and continuously 
increasing demand for the expenditure of 
money. The natives of Central America 
have no exacting requirements involving 
"taste," and therefore have no commerce. 
Our civilization of today is without the 
urge to create great works of art, we stag- 
nate. We are impressed with the costliness 
of our homes, our furniture, which are in 
fact, cheap. dirt cheap, for no future gen- 
eration will venerate them. 


We live in a machine made atmosphere. 
We have no longing for the beautiful hand 
made things. Therefore, we rot. Why do 
we not value beauty as a practical neces- 
sity as did the Romans and make acque- 
ducts and our bridges beautiful. We have 
no urge to do anything great except as we 
may contribute to a so-called practical pur- 
pose. And of course an "Interest" bearing 
security must be attached to each project. 


Did you ever stop to think that of the 
billions of dollars worth of buildings and 


by 
WILLIAM LEE WOOLLETE 
Architect 


the millions invested in ornamental fea- 
tures on those buildings there is not today 
one bit of stone carving which a Greek of 
the time of Pericles would kick over with 
his foot, much less lift and place in a mu- 
seum beside the Hermes of Praxiteles. 


As to spending money for unproductive 
constructions as the Egyptian Civilization 
spent money on its monuments, No!—that 
would be the height of absurdity. 


The Unearned Increment 

Then what about the unearned incre- 
ment in land values? People travel about 
in Fords. They settle on high priced land 
like fiies on an over-ripe piece of meat. 
People flock to unhealthy, flashy, realty 
values in the gambling spirit. I sometimes 
think of the sound of coppers dropped into 
a tin savings bank. Every time a Ford 
comes up and over the divide into Cali- 
fornia, a penny drops into a number of sav- 
ings bank. Moral—come in a Ford. 


Millions of acres of land held by private 
interests, untilled and unproductive, should 
be taxed. The tendency would be for this 
land to come back into the public domain 
where it really belongs and where the indi- 
vidual small owner may have the opportun- 
ity to re-locate and improve. The difficulty 
is not so much with the theory of such taxa- 
tion, but with the present ownership. The 
idea of confiscation is abhorent to our idea 
of property rights. To tax a bit of desert 
land. which some poor person has held for 
years, hoping for an increase of value or an 
opportunity to improve, to the extent that 
the owner is obliged to relinquish it, ap- 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 62 p NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


pears to be an injustice. And it is an injus- 
tice until such time as the owner can see the 
truth and himself ask for the application 
of the principle. 


Therefore I suggest an examination of 
this whole question in the spirit of co-op- 
eration. During the ensuing years, the in- 
telligent minds of the community should 
be encouraged to grind on the questions 
involved. 


Let us keep in mind that wisdom must 
come from information and experience, 
that theory may be of little use without ex- 
perience and the will to contact actual con- 
ditions. 


The politicians and the statisticians. the 
professors, even our high school students. 
should be encouraged to discuss these 
problems. Actuated by high motives and 
controlled by correct principles, the exam- 
ination of these questions can only result 
in a wiser generation. Апа the mass-con- 
sciousness functioning with the great 
human kindness like that which created the 
great Gothic era, to which we have referred 
elsewhere, will result perhaps in the human- 
izing of modern finance. 


Mass Consciousness 

The mass consciousness is necessary in 
order to carry any scheme of law and order 
into successful operation. We should be 
about our business of creating a mass-con- 
sciousness concerning these economic prob- 
lems. These problems can be solved by 
the power behind the throne. What is the 
power behind the throne? It is the power 
of loving kindness. Human intelligence 
has reached a stage in its evolution where 
a co-operative interest must be intelligently 
fostered, for we all know that we are living 
a communal life, a communal life as wide 
and as complex as the world. 


Wee are now assured by the passage of 
events that we are utterly dependent on 
each other. That larger intelligence which 
quides the destines of mankind must be 
first of all a co-operative thing, sensing 
more than all else the interdependence of 
all life. 


To recapitulate, we sense the necessity 
to examine the motives behind present day 


attempts to provide through state, city, and 
government bonds, work for the jobless. 
We seem to see such bond issues as a 
method to capitalize debts for the benefit 
of both the wage earner and the owner 
of securities. But events persuade us that 
public improvement bonds will be paid 
actually through and by means of the pur- 
chasing power of the wage earner. Such 
nuisances as excess produce should be done 
away with by force of taxation. We seem 
to see and know that a new age is upon 
и5 — ап age which requires each one to 
know the stop signals and a willingness to 
co-operate with others in obeying the sig- 
nals. There is a stop signal on over-pro- 
duction. Who are observing this signal? 


The Gambling Spirit 


When public benefits like modern hos- 
pitals, schools, etc., are provided out of the 
public exchequer, these benefits constitute 
usually besides an original item of expense 
to the taxpayer, a contingent expense on 
account of maintenance. For a people to 
economize and attempt to balance the 
budget. is admirable. То assume for pos- 
terity disproportionate obligations, gamb- 
ling on the ability to pay for present day 
necessities, is suicidal. 


The expenditure of public money which 
has to be repaid through future taxation, is 
a doubtful operation. The expenditure of 
public money raised by means of a tax on 
surplus, is, on the other hand, defeasible, 
providing it does not entail coincident ob- 
ligations for maintenance of improvements. 


Industry should be given every oppor- 
tunity to function unimpeded by the red 
tape of legislative restrictions, but industry 
should be informed coersively, if neces- 
sary, of the facts relating to over-produc- 
tion, and should be held responsible for 
committing the crime of over-production— 
gambling! 


To advocate the continuous, regular, 
systematic expenditure of monev collected 
as taxes on accumulated wealth in the 
hands of either individuals, estates, trusts, 
corporations, etc., in non-productive mon- 
uments and entailing no maintenance, is a 
perfectly sane proposition, for every civil- 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER «4 63 = NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


ization from the beginning of time has used 
much of its surplus in this manner. Near 
Peking in the Valley of the Five Tombs, 
a space about the size of the San Fernando 
Valley, near Los Angeles. California, or a 
space ten times larger than the Island of 
Manhattan, is given over to a series of 
magnificent monuments, the whole place 
being unproductive — save to joy alone. 
The nobility of man, the divinity of his 
majestic sway on earth, are here spelled 
in letters which may be read by all men. 


Compare this systematic use of the sur- 
plus for cultural purposes with the irregu- 
lar, spasmodic dumping of commodities on 
a gutted market, willfully throwing away 
produce, the scrapping of automobiles, the 
dumping of milk in gutters, the burying of 
citrus fruit, the sinking of surplus ships. 


Rodman says, "The governments of the 
earth rest on the patience of the poor.” 


Is there sufficient wisdom to bring about 
a sane solution for our economic ills? Is 
there sufficient sacrificial valor to enable 
the possible to come true?— Blessed are 
the meek in spirit, for they shall inherit the 
earth." 


International Debt 


Regarding foreign reparations, interna- 
tional debt, moratoriums, ete.: Of what 
benefit is the present complicated matrix 
of antagonistically phrased debt structure? 
Would it not be better if each nation were 
on the basis of a balanced budget, and a 
reserve if possible? 


If you send a boy to war, and he becomes 
one of the "Unknown Dead”, does anyone 
arrange to capitalize HIS loss, issue bonds 
and collect interest? Under identical con- 
ditions is a dollar shot away, and do we 
capitalize the debt and hang the burden on 
posterity? Are these questions misleading 
and subversive? Are these questions, in 
fact, naive? 


Is it entirely logical that war should be 
considered an investment rather than a 
loss? Do we all know that if surplus had 


been obliged to shoulder the expense of the 
World War, there would have been no 
war? Should the man in the street be 
amused when he gets into the same jack- 
pot twice? Can the man in the street do 
anything to help himself, except to be part 
of a mass-consciousness? 


Does community wealth come primarily 
from labor? Why should labor be required 
to stand under capitalized war debts guar- 
anteeing the advances made by surplus? 
Are original investments in liberty bonds 
and like securities made from the savings 
of mankind, "from surplus?" 


That the vast and complicated machin- 
ery of modern finance may not be taken 
by the tail and turned in the opposite direc- 
tion is patent. But the direction in which 
we are going mav be altered — should at 
least be known. Who knows and affirms 
any fundamental principles by which we 
may be guided? Are we going on to more 
debts and more complicated commitments 
in order to save or try to save vested in- 
terests? Are we pointed in the direction 
of liquidation? Are we committed forever 
to the principle of paying tomorrow, or 
shall we begin to pay today, by taxing the 
surplus? 


If the world hasn't enough surplus with 
which to pay for a war, it would seem wise 
not to indulge in a war. War is a vast 
gamble. Why not accept the findings in 
the cards of financial resource as they lay 
at the beginning of the game, rather than 
at the end? 


Combined with a Gothic gentleness and 
a love of mankind, Germany could have 
dominated the world. It remains for the 
world to learn the less on of peace. 


Men who have not the capacity to exam- 
ine without prejudice and with patience the 
problems of the day should not be tolerated 
in our legislative halls. We need wisdom, 
not war. How far is it true that "the gov- 
ernments of the earth rest on the patience 
of the poor?" 

[The End] 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER < 64 > NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


RESIDENCE ОЕ MR. AND MRS. MARTIN WHITE, SAN DIEGO 
William Н. Wheeler, Architect 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 65 » NOVEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


« « « « With the Architects » » » » 


PREDICTS BUILDING BOOM 

Н, ]. Brunnier, С. E., with offices in the Sharon 
Building, San Francisco, says that unless present 
indications are very misleading. the San Francisco- 
Bay area will experience a building boom next 
spring unparalleled in recent years. He backs his 
prediction by citing Federal, state, county and 
city work in the bay city region, appropriations 
for which have already been made and actual con- 
struction authorized. The aggregate cost of this 
work runs into many millions of dollars. The 
Eastern building material houses and factories may 
well look to the Pacific Coast for their greatest 
volume of business in 1933. 


OFFICE BUILDING 

Martin J. Rist, Phelan Building, San Francisco, 
is completing plans for a three-story and base- 
ment Class C reinforced concrete and brick store 
and office building, to be erected on the northwest 
corner of Columbus Avenue and Green Street, 
San Francisco, at an estimated cost of $70,000. 
There will be six stores and two floors of offices 
for physicians and dentists. ]. Capurro is the 
owner. 


FACTORY WAREHOUSE 

The Best Foods, Inc., 1900 Bryant Street, San 
Francisco, will erect a four-story reinforced con- 
crete warehouse and a one-story concrete garage 
on its property on Bryant Street, near 18th, San 
Francisco, at a cost of $90,000. The plans were 
prepared in the office of К. Theill, structural en- 
gineer, 880 Market Street, San Francisco. 


VETERANS' HOSPITAL 
Bids are to be opened by the Federal Govern- 
ment, December 20th, for the erection of a group 
of hospital buildings at Fort Miley, San Fran- 
cisco. The hospital is for the Veterans of the 


World War and will represent an expenditure of 
$1,500,000. 


LOS ANGELES RESIDENCE 
Robert B. Farquhar, architect, Security Build- 
ing, Los Angeles, is preparing plans for a two- 
story brick residence to be built on South Carol 
Wood Drive, near Los Angeles, for Charles Н. 
Quinn. 


66 


ARCHITECT FRACTURES ARM 

А. M. Edelman of Los Angeles, has been а 
patient at the Cedars of Lebanon hospital, Los 
Angeles, suffering from a broken arm. Mr. Edel- 
man was one of the delegates to the meeting of 
the State Association of California Architects at 
Del Monte. Stopping at San Francisco en route, 
he was leaving the hotel when he slipped on the 
wet pavement, and fell, his arm being broken at 
the shoulder. 


PERSONAL 

Осрем F. BEEMAN, architectural engineer, has 
moved from the Paulsen Building to the Wash- 
ington Brick and Lime Building, 326 Pacific Ave- 
nue, Spokane. Mr. Beeman is conducting a night 
school class at the Y. M. C. A. for blue print 
reading and estimating. 

WILLIAM L. BangrHOLET, architectural designer 
of Seattle who has resided for the past year at 
Madison Park, has moved to an apartment house 
at 2328 Tenth Avenue, North. 

WiarrER Kerry, architect, formerly in the 
Guardian Building, is now located in the Artisans 
Building, Portland, Oregon. 

The golf championship of the Oregon State 
Chapter, А. I. А., was taken by Francis Jacob- 
erger, McKay Building, Portland. Mr. Jacoberger 
defeated Roscoe Hemenway “three up and one 
to до” with a medal score of 82. 

The firm of Edwards & Schary has dissolved, 
effective October 29th. Н. A. ScHanv will con- 
duct his business as architect at 605 Market Street, 
San Francisco, while Тноѕ. М. Epwarps is 
located in the Underwood Building, 525 Market 
Street, San Francisco. 

М. Lester Troast, member of Washington 
Chapter, А. I. A., who makes his headquarters 
at Juneau, Alaska, has received high commenda- 
tion for his design and supervision of the con- 
struction of the Wrangell Institute at Shoemaker 
Bay, Alaska. 

MELVILLE Солев, Јв., for seven years manager 
of Southern California Chapter, Associated Gen- 
сга] Contractors of America, has terminated his 
work for that organization. 

А. S. NiBECKER, JR., chief of the Los Angeles 
board of education's division of architecture, has 
been made a member of the national school com- 
mittee of the American Institute of Architects. 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


Index to Advertising Announcements 


For Classified List of Advertisers see Pages 93, 94, 95 
L 


Aka оа Фо я | 82 
American Міне Co), кене се на а е 86 
American Roling МИ З ЕЕ 87 
ое SENSIS бааа 82 
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. ............ ы 
Anderson and Ringrose .....................—.——.-—— 92 
Аура 005, (Cla ооо НРАННЕА 90 
В 
Bass-Heuter Paint Co. ...........................Васк Cover 
Bares Canpenter ON ee 90 
Bay State Brick €? Cement Coating ................ 81 
ПА ЕР сопе боаз 72 
БЕЛЕ. 79 
тапта ссерешбетіне-- ee 90 
Боп Hardwood Co, G 0 -. 83 
С 
(зог пс Затое СС 1E. 
[1 [ога Sales бова 81 
Calitorniayshade Cloth Cow Inc, 22 83 
Ciak Зое INI о ee es ae ee 7 
Clervi Marble & Mosaic Со. ........................... 89 
(огап Construction CO. e 2 . 85 
Cook Marble Co., Ray о 87 
(Сое аш: рау ы м... 88 
бие МЕНІ Chute ese oo 79 
р 
Davey тестке Co., ШЧ. .......................... D 
Пса Steel Products Сы... 91 
Ше Поппе Properties а 86 
акс Ону Mir Со, W Sese cce 86 
Dinwiddie Construction Co. .........................-. 92 
Drafting & Engineering Service ...................... 86 
E 
Eisele & Dondero Marble Co. ..................... 82 
Blewatommoupplies Con ince 76 
F 
Enkie Schindler бо 89 
Eorderer Cornice А/О. 88 
Fenere DA сан e See en RE 91 
Гает, ЯЛЫ © (CL EO Е 3 
G 
Garnett Young & Company ............................ 88 
General Roofing Со. .......................... 90 
(ссп с Bros Mig ба 0) - 86 
Gladdines McBean © Фо 8 
Grace, TONI ааа Иа Е 
Grinnell Company of the Pacific .................. 87 
Соло (Clases: Works а 17 
Cunn Фалес Фора 3 
H 
Haws Sanitary Drinking Faucet Co. ................ 79 
Holmes Eureka Lumber бос 87 
Hunton Robert NERO ES 88 
Bunea & Jokelan a eee 89 
] 
Пепѕеп GL JE. WE о Е гис 90 
Пай т Cog БЫ ВЕЕ 92 
Naltmiscmp servicer бо е 3 
соп Jiu (Обь ал 84 
K 
ео асе Boiler борі... 86 
БЕС Mie (eo es 85 


Larseni неа о — = у 99 
Leather Mat MiS Со кше NM 
Lesher, Н. M. Ее сз NER 
Lindgren & Swinerton, Tne T S 80 
M 
MaeDonald & Kahm 222 92 
MacGruer Со, ee е 84 
Ме пес Мага Conn 87 
McGilyray Raymond Са 15 
Ме еаг Brick Come. кше 90 
Mercury В 87 
Monarch поп Works КОРЕНЕ 82 
Mueller: (Co; eem оъ. ETE 84 
Mullen Manulacturing Сө. EE 90 
Musto Sons Keenan Co., Joseph ...................... 86 
N 
National Lead Company ........................ Back Cover 
Northern Кае ДО ES 97 
О 
Ocean Shore Иол ог Вне 89 
Otis Elevator Company e 2 2nd Cover 
P 
Рас Coast Engineerine (ос E ME 92 
Pacine Coast Electrical Bureau ene 9 
Басіне Coast Gas Association 22 6 
расте Coast Steel Фор a 
Расте Roundry Со E T IM NM 75 
Расше Manufacturing 2. 91 
Расе Metals Co Ша RE 75 
Pacific Portland белен” 96 
Palace) Hardware о 91 
Рата пе сан 1 
Parker Co. Ine. K ES S aon 89 
Picard. Ine, ЗМ 88 
Pittsburgh Plate Glass) Gom 5 
Q 
Quandt & оо 91 
R 
Бао Э а t E ES 89 
Republie Steel Corp nE 92 
Sandoval Sales (Со... eee 90 
Santa Fe Lumber Company cc 91 
Sherman, Clay © Со О Фо 
бгаа о =ош 88 
Sloane; Wo ted, зы ешш 84 
Stage Eguipment Studios mea 78 
Sanles Works, The aeee S 81 
Этее Гоги Contracting Co. Е 91 
Stockholm OOnsE oee a 86 
Sunset Lumber Co. eee ES 91 
at 
Tormey Company, ее 88 
У 
Volker со М шл н 89 
Мацаһап С В o оо шо 83 
Ww 
Wells Fargo Ва 80 
Western Iron Works 2-22 92 
Westinghouse Electric Elevator Co. ................ 3 
Мао таре Con E RE 85 
У 
оспо ев Могзипеуег < 87 


*Appears alternate months 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


67 


GROUP OF FACTORY BUILDINGS 

The Engineering Department of the Standard 
Brands of California, a subsidiary of the Fleish- 
mann Yeast Company, is preparing plans for a 
group of industrial buildings, including ware- 
house, factory and garage, to be built at Jones 
Avenue and San Leandro Boulevard, Oakland, 
early in 1933 at a cost of $750,000. The com- 
pany's New York address is 595 Madison Ave- 
nue, New York City. 


NEW RADIO STATION 

A 300 foot steel tower for broadcasting pur- 
poses is to be built by the General Electric Com- 
pany, east of Belmont in San Mateo County. 
Plans for the tower and a two-story reinforced 
concrete transmitter building have been prepared 
by H. J. Brunnier and a contract for the work 
has been awarded to Lindgren & Swinerton, Inc., 
of San Francisco. 


STORE BUILDING 

C. A. Meussdorffer, architect, Humboldt Bank 
Building, San Francisco, has completed plans for 
a one-story and basement Class C store building, 
to be erected on the south side of Fulton Street, 
west of Market, San Francisco, for A. W. Wilson. 
Mr. Meusdorffer states that he has prospects of 
considerable other commercial work in his office. 


BOHEMIAN CLUB BUILDING 

Plans have been completed in the office of Lewis 
P. Hobart, Crocker Building, San Francisco, for a 
five-story Class А club building to be erected on 
the northeast corner of Taylor and Post Streets, 
San Francisco, for the Bohemian Club. The struc- 
ture will cost $800,000. Will P. Day is the struc- 
tural engineer. 


ARCHITECT NAMED 
Benjamin J. Hirschfeld, architect of San Fran- 
cisco, has been appointed construction engineer 
for the Merced Post Office Building. Hirschfeld 
was formerly in the office of Arthur Brown, Jr., 
and later he practiced for himself. 


MARKET BUILDING 
Plans are practically complete for a one-story 
and basement reinforced concrete market building 
with Lamella wood truss roof for Fred H. Mor- 
gan and associates. The building has been de- 
signed by William H. Weeks and will be built on 


Franklin Street, Oakland, at an estimated cost of 
$45,000. 


68 


FOR CLOSER CONTACT 

To foster a closer relationship between archi- 
tects, owners and manufacturers, a movement has 
been started by Los Angeles architects in a pro- 
gram which includes half day conferences with 
clients and building material manufacturers in the 
Architects Building Material Exhibit, Fifth and 
Figueroa Streets. Each architect will spend a half 
day a month in the display rooms, according to 
the present schedule, to confer with manufactur- 
ers, and to meet clients and show them the actual 
installation of the materials which he plans to 
specify. The first week's program included Roland 
E. Coate, Harold Chambers, H. Roy Kelley, 
Hibbard and Gerity, John Byers, Newton and 
Murray, Henry Withey, Раш! Williams, Richard 
J. Neutra and R. M. Schindler. The schedule for 
the remainder of November includes Gordon B. 
Kaufmann, Reginald D. Johnson, Carlton Monroe 
Winslow, Witmer and Watson, Arthur Kelley 
and others. 


ENGINEERS’ ANNUAL 

The Engineers Club of Los Angeles, held their 
annual meeting and election of officers October 21 
in their new quarters in the Richfield Building, 
Los Angeles. Charles S. Howe was elected presi- 
dent; J. N. Kelman, senior vice-president; Norman 
Kelch, junior vice-president; E. R. Stauffacher, 
secretary, and Fred Garrison, treasurer. 


POST OFFICE ADDITION 
Plans have been approved for a four-story re- 
inforced concrete addition to the San Francisco 
post office building. Drawings were made by 
George W. Kelham, architect, and H. J. Brun- 
nier, structural engineer. The appropriation for 
the addition is $750,000. 


INFIRMARY ADDITION 
A two-story brick addition to the county in- 
firmary at San Rafael, has been authorized by the 
supervisors of Marin County. Plans for the struc- 
ture are being prepared in the office of S. Heiman, 
605 Market Street, San Francisco. 


TUBERCULAR SANITARIUM 
Plans have been completed for а tubercular 


patients sanitarium on the county hospital grounds, 
San Luis Obispo. 


PERSONAL 
Leo Е. BACHMAN has moved from 331 S. Wes- 
tern Avenue to 3142 Wilshire Boulevard, Los 
Angeles. 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


Estimator's Guide 


Giving Cost of Building Materials, Wage Scale, Etc. 


Amounts quoted are figuring prices and are made up from average quotations 
furnished by material houses to three leading contracting firms of San Francisco. 


АП prices and wages quoted are for 
San Francisco and the Bay District. 
There may be slight fluctuation of 
prices in the interior and soutbern 
part of the state. Freight cartage, at 
least, must be added in figuring coun- 
try work. 

Overtime in wage scale should be 
credited with time and a half, Sunday 
and holidays double. 


Bond—11!276 amount of contract. 


Brickwork— 

Cominon, $27 to $32 per 1000 laid, 
(according to class of work). 

Face, $60 to $80 per 1000 laid, (ac- 
cording to class of work). 

Brick Steps, using pressed brick, 
$.85 lin. ft. 

Brick Walls, using pressed brick on 
edge, 55c sq. ft. (Foundations ex- 


tra.) 

Brick Veneer on frame buildings, 
$.60 sq. ft. 

Common, f. o. b. cars, $14.00 plus 
cartage. 


Face, f.o.b. cars, $38.00 per 1000, 
carload lots. 


HOLLOW TILE FIREPROOFING (í.o.b. job) 
РУ VERSES OE $ 68.00 per M 
4x12x12 in.. 16.50 per M 
Gio? ар eere 105.00 per M 
Вт. 170.00 рег М 


HOLLOW BUILDING TILE (f.o.b. job) 
carload lots). 


Cdi c —— M 
6x12x5% .. 


Composition Floors — 18c to 30c per 
за. ft. In large quantities, 18c per 
sq. ft. laid. 

Mosaic Floors—$80c per sq. ft. 

Duraflex Floor—23c to 30c sq. ft. 

Rubber Tile—50c per sq. ft. 

Terazzo Floors—40c to 55c per sq. ft. 


Terazzo Steps—4$1.50 lin. ft. 


Concrete Work (material at San Fran- 
cisco bunkers) — Quotations below 
2000 lbs. to the ton. 


No. 3 rock, at bunkers........ $1.66 per ton 
No. 4 rock, at bunkers...... 1.65 per ton 
Elliott top gravel, at bnkrs. 1.75 per ton 
Washed gravel, at bunkrs 1.75 per ton 
Eliott top gravel, at bnkrs. 1.75 per ton 
City gravel, at bunkers.... 1.40 per ton 
River sand, at bunkers...... 1.50 per ton 
Delivered bank sand............ 1.10 cu yd. 


Note—Above prices are subject to dis- 
count of 10c per ton on invoices paid 
on or before the 15th of month, fol- 
lowing delivery. 


SAND 


Del Monte, $1.75 to $3.00 per ton. 
Fan Shell Beach (car lots, f. o.b. 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


Lake Majella), $2.75 to $4.00 per 
ton. 
Cement, $2.25 per bbl. in paper sks. 
Cement (f.o.b. Job, S. F.) $2.15 per 


bbl. 
Cement (f.o.b. Job, Oak.) $2.45 рег 
per bb 
Rebate of 10 cents bbl. cash in 15 
days. 
Medusa “White” .......... $ 8.50 per bbl. 


Forms, Labors average 22.00 per M. 
Average cost of concrete in place, 
exclusive of forms, 28с per cu. ft. 
4-inch concrete basement 
floor.......... 1215c to 1335c per sq. ft. 
415 inch Concrete Basement 


Moore 13c to 14c per ва. ft. 
2-inch rat-proofing...675c per за. ft. 
Concrete Steps.......... $1.00 per lin. ft. 


Dampproofing and Waterproofing— 
Two-coat work, 16c per yard. 
Membrane waterproofing—4 layers 

of saturated felt, $4.50 per square. 
Hot coating work, $1.80 per square. 
Medusa Waterproofing, 15%c рег 

bbl, San Francisco Warehouse. 


Electric Wiring — $2.75 to $8.90 per 
outlet for conduit work (including 


switches). 

Knob and tube average $2.25 to 
$5.00 per outlet, including 
switches. 

Elevators— 


Prices vary according to capacity, 
speed and type. Consult elevator 
companies. Average cost of in- 
stalling an automatic elevator in 
four-story building, $2450; direct 
automatic, about $2400. 


Execavation— 

Sand, 40 cents; clay or shale, 90c 
per yard. 

Teams, $10.00 per day. 

Trucks, $18 to $25 per day. 

Above figures are ап average with- 
out water. Steam shovel work in 
large quantities, less; hard ma- 
terial, such as rock, will run con- 
siderably more. 


Fire Escapes— 
Ten-foot balcony, with stairs, 
$65.00 per balcony. 


Glass (consult with manufacturers)— 

Double strength window glass, 15c 
per square foot. 

Quartz Lite, 50c per square foot. 
Plate 80c per square foot. 

Art, $1.00 up per square foot. 

Wire (for skylights), 27c per square 
foot. 

Obscure glass, 25c square foot. 

Note—Add extra for setting. 


Neating— 
Average, $1.60 per sq. ft. of гайіа- 
tion, according to conditlons. 


lron—Cost of ornamental iron, cast 
iron, etc. depends on designs. 
Lumber (prices delivered to bldg. site) 
Common, $19.00 per M (average). 
Common O.P. select, average, $22.00 
per М. 


1x6 No. 3— Form Lumber 
1x4 No. 1 flooring VG 
1х4 No. 2 flooring ...... 
1х4 No. 3 flooring 


.$14.00 per M 
50.00 per M 
42.00 per M 
36.00 per M 


1x6 No. 2 flooring .......... .. 42.00 per M 

1/,х4 and 6 No. 2 flooring..... 50.00 per M 
Slash grain— 

1х4 №. 2 ол. $32.00 рек М 


1x4 No. 3 flooring .......... .. 30.00 per M 


No. 1 common run Т. & G...... 26.00 per M 
cathe c тот оо ОЕ 4.15 рек М 
Shingles (add cartage to prices 
quoted)— 


Redwood, No. 1 ....—...-... 
Redwood. No. 2 .... 
Red Cedar .............. 2 


...$ .85 per Һ е. 
.65 per bdle. 
.85 per bdle. 


Hardwood Flooring (delivered to 
building)— 
18-16x314" T & С Maple. 
1 1-16x214" T & G Маре 
765x315 sq. edge Maple ... 
x2" 6-16х2” 


13-16x214 

T&G T&G — Sq.Ed. 
Clr. Qtd. Oak ....$175.00 М $125.00 М $168 M 
Sel. Qtd. Oak ... 115.00 М 95.00 М 110M 
Clr. Pla. Oak ... 110.00 М 87.00 М 95M 
Sel. Pla. Oak —. 106.00 М 68.00 М 82M 
Clear Maple ........ 110.00 M 82.00 M 
Laying & Finishing  14cít. 12 ft. 
Wage—Floor layers, $9.00 рег day. 


.$100.00 M ft. 
. 127.00 M ft. 
. 120.00 M ft. 


lle ft. 


Building Paper— 
1 ply per 1000 ft. гоП............................. $2.65 
2 ply per 1000 ft. roll... .... 4.00 
3 ply per 1000 ft. roll 
Sisalkraft, 500 ft. roll 
Sash RU com. No y 
Sash cord com. No. 
Sash cord spot No. T. 1.60 per 100 ft. 
Sash cord spot No. 8.—.... 1.90 per 100 ft, 
Sash weights cast iron, $45.00 ton 
Nails, $2.85 base. 
Belgian nails, $2.60 base. 


Millwork— 

O. P. $74.00 per 1000. R. W., $80.00 
рег 1000 (delivered). 

Double hung box window frames, 
average, with trim, $5.00 and up. 
each. 

Doors, including trim (single panel, 
1% in. Oregon pine) $5.75 and up, 
each. 

Doors, including trim (five panel, 
1% in. Oregon pine) $5.50 each. 

Screen doors, $3.50 each. 

Patent screen windows, 20c a sq. ft. 
Cases for kitchen pantries seven ft. 
bigh, per lineal ft., $4.25 each. 
Dining room cases, $5.25 per Ішегі 

foot. 

Labor—Rough carpentry, warehouse 
heavy framing (average), $11.00 
per M. 

For smaller work, average, $22 to 
$30 per 1000. 


1.10 per 100 ft. 


69 


Marble—(See Dealers) 


шт S 


Painting— 
Two-coat work ........ ..97с per yard 
Three-coat work ... ..36c per yard 
Cold Water Painting ...... 8с per yard 
Whitewashing ......--- 4с per yard 


Turpentine, 70c рег gal, in cans and 
80c per gal. in drums. 

Raw Linseed Oil—62c gal. in bbls. 

Boiled Linseed Oil—65c gal. in bbls. 

Medusa Portland Cement Paint, 20c 
per 10. 


Carter or Dutch Boy White Lead iu 
ОП (in steel kegs). 

Per Lh. 

1 ton lots, 100 lbs. net weight 1034 с 

500 1b. and less than 1 ton lots 11с 

Less than 500 Ib. lots.. 11%с 


Dutch Boy Dry Red Lead and 
Litharge (in steel kegs). 
1 ton lots, 100 1b. kegs, net wt. 1034€ 
500 lb. and less than 1 ton lots lic 
Less than 500 lb. 10Ё5............--.-.- 11%с 


Red Lead іп Oil (in steel kegs) 


1 ton lots, 100 1b. keg snet. wt. 1215c 
500 lb. and less than 1 ton lots 12%с 
Less than 500 10. 1016..................... 13c 


Note—Accessibility and conditions 
cause wide variance of costs. 


_————-—— 


Putent Chimneys— 


6-inch.... ...$1.00 lineal foot 
8-inch. .. 1.50 lineal foot 
10-inch. .. 1.85 lineal foot 
12-incb.... .. 2.10 lineal foot 


sss 


Plastering—Interior— 
Yard 
} coat, brown mortar only, wood lath....50.36 
2 coats, lime mortar hard finiah, wood 
lath 
2 coats, har 


Craft 
Asbeatos workers 


Wage Per Day 
ixi 


Bricklayers ........... 8.80 
Bricklayera' hodcarriers 5.60 
Cabinet workers (outside) . 7.20 
Caisson workers (open) 6.40 
Carpenters ............. 7.20 
Cement finishers 7.20 
Cork insulation workers 7.20 
Electric workers ............. 7.20 
Electric fixture hangers 6.40 
Elevator constructora 8.00 

нер. 5.60 
Engineers, portable and 7.20 
Glass workers ........... 6.80 
Hardwood floormen 1.20 
Housemovers ............. 6.40 
Housesmiths, architectural iron 7.20 


Housesmitha, reinforced concrete or 
төойтеп 2.2.22... LO 7.20 


lron workers (bridge and structural) in- 


rluding engineers . 8.80 
Laborers, building 5.00 
Laborers, common .. 4.00 
Lathers, channel iron 8.00 


Lathers, all others .. 
Marble setters 


Helpers .. 00 
Millwrights .. 7.20 
Model makera 8.00 


Model casters ... 
Mosaic and terazzo workera 


70 


1932 Wage Schedule for San Francisco Building Trades 


Established by Builders’ Exchange and Endorsed by Various Crafts 


3 coats, metal lath and plaster 

Keene cement on metal lath .... m" 

сше with 34 hot roll channels metal 
at 


lath plastered „и-нете 
Shingle partition 94 channel Jath 1 side .60 
Single partition % channel lath 2 sides 

9 inches 1ҺісК олени ионной 2.00 
4-inch douhle partition 94 channel lath 

2 aided RR 1.20 
4-inch double partition 94 channel lath 

2 sides plastered a 


Plastering—Exterior— 


Yard 
2 coata cement finish, brick or con- 
Crete wall 2222... 2.2... тте е ее .90 
2 coats Atlas cement, brick or con- 
crete ма... eterne 1.15 
$ сома cement finish No. 18 gauge 
wire mesh „лилии линии вене .60 
3 coata Medusa finish No. 18 gauge 
wire mesh .....- еек mene еее еее т. 2.90 
Wood lath, $4.00 per 1000. 
2.5-lh. metal lath (dipped) oi 


2.5-lb. metal lath (galvanized).. .20 
3.4-№. metal lath (dipped)...... о 7722 
3.4-]h. metal lath (galvanized). mo 228 


34-inch hot roll channels, $12 per ton. 


Finish plaster, $16.40 ton; in paper васКа, 
Dealer'a commission, $1.00 off above 
quotations. 
$13.85 (rebate 10c sack). 
Lime, f.o.h. warehouse, $2.25bhl. ; сага. $2.15 
Lime, bulk (ton 2000 lba.), $16.00 ton. 
Wall Board 5 ply, $43.00 per M. 
Hydrate Lime. $19.50 ton. 


Composition Stueco—$1.35 to $1.75 per 
sq. yard (applied). 


LL Ls 
Pinmbing— 


From $55.00 per fixture ир, accord- 
ing to grade, quantity and runs. 


oo 


Roofing— 


“Standard” tar and gravel, $5.00 per 
square for 30 squares or over. 
Less than 30 squares, $5.25 per sq. 

Tile, $17.00 to $30.00 per square. 

Redwood Shingles, $11.00 per square 
in place. 

Cedar Shingles, $10 sq. in place. 

Recoat, with Gravel, $3.00 per sq. 


2-22-22... —___ 


иди 


Craft Wage Per Day 

Helpers ... .. 5.00 

Painters .. 7.00 
Painters, varnishera and polishers (out- 


aide) 
Piledrivers and wharf builders 
Piledrivers, engineers 
Plaaterers ..................... 
Plasterers’ hodcarriers . 
Plumbers .................. 
Roofera, composition . 
Roofers, all others . 
Sheet metal workers . 
Sprinkler fitters . 
Steam fittcrs .... 
Stair builders .. 
Stecl pan, concrete 
Stone cutters, soft and granite . 
Stone setters, soft and granite . 
Stone derrickmen 
ТИе setters 

Нарега .... 
Tile, cork and rubber . sets 
Auto truck drivers, less than 2500 pounds 

do, 2500 Ibs. to 4500 Ibs. . = 

do, 4500 Ibs. to 6500 Ibs. 

do, 6500 Ibs. and over .. 
General teamsters, 1 horse . 

do, 2 horses .... 

do, 4 horses .... 
Plow teamsters, 4 horses . 
Scraper teamsters, 2 horses 

do, 4 horses .... 


e 


ь-ооооо 


DAWA 00 0 a1 га 


Dnosnmnoon 


сл зз сх оо та уз < 
io c © Вә Ез 00 Әз о о 00 N è 
aooeooooooocoooooooo 


ononon 
ecoococo 


AAI HD 


Sheet Metal— 


Windows—Metal, $1.80 a sq. foot. 
Fire doors (average), including 
hardware, $2.00 per sq. ft. 


рии 


Skylights— 


Copper, $1.00 sq. ft. (not glazed). 
Galvanized iron, 25c sq. ft. (not 
glazed). 


нн >= 


Steel—Structural 


$80 ton (erected), this quotation is 
an average for comparatively 
small quantities. Light truss 
work higher. Plain beams and 
column work in large quantities 

$73 to $78 per ton cost of steel; 

average building, $77.00. 

Steel Reiniorcing— 
$68.00 per ton, set, (average). 


дд 


Stone— 
Granite, average, $6.50 cu. foot in 
place. 
Sandstone, average Blue, $3.50; 


Boise, $2.60 sq. ft. in place. 
Indiana Limestone, $2.80 per sq. ft. 
in place. 


nes 


Store Fronts— 


Copper sash bars for store fronts, 
corner, center and around sides, 
will average 70c per lineal foot. 


Note—Consult with agents. 


дд 


Tile — Floor, Wainscot, Ete. — (See 
Dealers). 


А 


GENERAL WORKING CONDITIONS— 


1. Eight hours shall constitute а day's work 
for all crafts, except as otherwise noted. 

2. Plasterers’ Hodcarriers, Bricklayers’ Hodcar- 
riers, Roofers’ Laborers and Engineers, Portable 
and Hoisting, shall start 15 minutes hefore other 
workmen, both at morning and at noon. 

3. Five days, consisting of поі more than 
eight hours a day, on Monday to Friday inclz- 
sive, shall constitute a week’s work. 

4! The wages set forth herein shall be cone 
sidered аз net wages. 

5. Transportation costs in excess of twenty-five 
cents each way shall Ъе paid by the contractor. 

6. Traveling time in excess of one and one-half 
hours each way shall be paid for at straight 
time rates. 

7. Overtime shall be paid as follows: For the 
first four hours after the first eight hours, time 
and one-half, All time thereafter shall be paid 
double time. Saturdays (except Laborers), Sun- 
days and Holidays from 12 midnight of the pre- 
ceding day, shall be paid double time. 

8. On Saturday Laborers sball be paid straight 
time for an eight-hour day. 

9. Where two sbifts are worked in any twenty- 
four hours, shift time shall be straight time. 
Where three shifts are worked, eight hours’ pay 
shall be paid for seven hours on the second and 
third shifts. 

10. All work, except as noted in paragraph 11, 
shall be performed between the hours of 8 а. m. 
and 5 p. m. 

11. Їп emergencies, whete premises cannot be 
vacated until the close of business, men then 
reporting for work shall work at straight time. 
Any work performed on such jobs aíter midnight 
shall be paid time and one-half up to four hours 
of overtime and double time thereafter, provided, 
that if a new crew is employed on Saturdays, 
Sundays or Holidays which has not worked dur- 
ing the five preceding working days, such crew 
shall be paid time and one-half. No job can be 
considered as an emergency job until it has been 
registered with the Industrial Association and a 
determination has been made that the job falls 
within the terms of this section. 

12. Recognized holidays to be: New Year's 
Day, Decoration Day, Fourth of July, Labor 
Day, Admission Day, "Thanksgiving Day, Christ- 
mas Day. 

13. Men ordered to report for work, for whom 
no employment is provided, shall be entitled to 
two hours’ pay. 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


AN ALL ELECTRIC KITCHEN ON WHEELS 


MERCHANDISING plan that is to edu- 
mW cate the American housewife to the appre- 
ciation of the 1933 “All-Electric Magic Kitchen" 
has been inaugurated by the General Electric 
Company, according to P.B.Zimmerman, manager 
of the General Electric Company's refrigeration 
department. 

Coincidental with the announcement, Mr. Zim- 
merman stated that an order had been placed for 
a fleet of General Electric kitchen coaches. The 
G. E. kitchen coach, a proven sound merchan- 


diser, is expected to materially augment sales of 
General Electric kitchens and other electrical 
appliances manufactured by the General Electric 
Company to lighten the work of the American 
housewife. 

The new kitchen coach, with its modernly de- 
signed exterior, carries the model 1933 dream 
kitchen scientifically designed to lighten the work 
of the average housewife with electrical appli- 
ances so placed as to permit a maximum flow of 
work with an absolute minimum of effort. 

The kitchen provides—first, the correct appli- 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


ance for efficiently refrigerating tood, the monitor 
top General Electric refrigerator, and an auto- 
natic General Electric hotpoint range in which to 
prepare the food. 

All working surfaces in the new coach and food 
mixing devices are placed in position with relation 
to the electric refrigerator and the range to the 
end that the minimum amount of effort is required 
to prepare a complete meal. Kitchen cabinets in 
the coach are built under, over and to the side 
of working surfaces and appliances in such a 


"1 


1933 "DREAM KITCHEN" ОМ WHEELS 


manner that they provide storage facilities within 
easy reach. 

The General Electric dishwasher, an innovation 
in Monel metal working surfaces, is an integral 
part of the sink and is so situated that the washed 
and dried dishes may be placed in their cabinets 
with ease. 

This 1933 dream kitchen “оп wheels” is ап 
example of perfect kitchen illumination. Through 
the facilities of the largest lighting research lab- 
oratory in the world, namely, Nela Park, Cleve- 
land, Ohio, the General Electric Company has 


71 


provided for the sales coach and our future kitch- 
ens, a new system of brilliant lighting without 
glare. The new system, known as Soffit lighting, 
is of such a nature that the entire ceiling, walls, 
working surfaces and floors of the kitchen are 
flooded with light yet there is a marked absence 
of shadows. 

The kitchen coach, according to some of the 
nation's foremost economists who were called in 
to consultation when it was designed, is expected 
to make unusual strides in educating the Ameri- 
can housewife to the appreciation of a scientifically 
designed and electrically equipped kitchen as an 
important part of the modern home of today. 

In addition to the appliances already men- 
tioned, the kitchen coach carries a Monel metal 
sink, an electric exhaust fan, an electric clock, 
toaster, percolator, waffle iron, flat plate ironer, 
washing machine, radio, sun lamp, vacuum cleaner 
and other small table appliances. The coaches will 
be equipped, also, with planning desks. 

Before the order for this fleet of General Elec- 
tric kitchen coaches was placed, the first such 
coach was sent into the field and used by dis- 
tributors for six months as a test. This test 


proved so successful and brought such a tremen- 
dous increase in sales of complete С. Е. kitchens, 
refrigerators and ranges and other kitchen appli- 
ances, that distributors and dealers in all parts 
of the nation demanded this travelling display as 
standard sales equipment. 


During the six months test period, more than 
100,000 persons passed through the display coach 
and thousands of fine prospects were obtained. 


“The display coach aroused unusual interest 
in every city, town and hamlet we visited," de- 
clared the operators. "It gained an unusual amount 
of publicity and proved a tremendously powerful 
advertising medium for the dealer, distributor or 
utility wherever we were." 


So definite is the trend to modernize the Amer- 
ican kitchen with fully automatic electrical appli- 
ances that at the present writing the General Elec- 
trical Kitchen Institute in Chicago is literally 
swamped with sketches of present kitchens for 
redesigning. This planning service is made avail- 
able to the public. 


General Electric kitchens have been accorded 
the utmost confidence of American bankers to the 
extent that a most liberal finance plan is now 
available. A kitchen coach, similar to the one 
shown in the photograph, will be demonstrated by 
the L. H. Bennett Company, northern California 
distributors for General Electric refrigerators and 
household equipment. The kitchen will operate 
in San Francisco and contiguous territory from 
the San Francisco offices of L. H. Bennett Co., 
Stockton at Sutter Streets. The George Н. Bel- 
sey Co., southern California distributors, will also 
operate a kitchen from Los Angeles to cover their 
respective territory. 


General Electric ГЕ 


A New Service 


One of the serious problems, in planning a home to 
the full satisfaction of a client, is probably the 
kitchen. Appreciating this and wishing to co-operate 
with architects and builders, we are now able to 
offer thru the General Electric Kitchen Institute, 
a new and complete planning service to assimilate 
ideas, of families building or remodeling, into a 
completely modern, efficient and harmonized kitchen 
layout. This service, of course, is in full co-opera- 
tion with the architect and contractor. 


GENERAL 


The 


KITC 


L. Н. BENNETT Company, LTD. 


to Architects 


For a new home the plan may be carried out im- 
mediately. ‘For remodeling, the plan is a goal to 
work to, hy adding one appliance after another, as 
means permit, until the kitchen is complete, as 
originally planned, with, of course, General Electric 
appliances thruout. The method of promoting and 
merchandising this idea to the public will be thru 
the use of a new General Electric sales coach, а 
modern electric kitchen on wheels. You will have 
an opportunity to see this beautiful demonstrator 
soon. Watch for invitation. 


ELECTRIC 


HEN 


NORTHERN G. E. 
CALIFORNIA Arie HOME AP- 
DISTRIBUTOR 401 SU ER STREET PLIANCE STORES 


С. Е. REFRIGERATORS, HOTPOINT RANGES 


SAN FRANCISCO 


5. Е., OAKLAND, SACRAMENTO, SAN JOSE 


72 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


BIG HARDWOOD FLOOR CONTRACT 

Cellized wood floor tile, manufactured by the 
E. L. Bruce Company of Memphis, Tennessee, is 
being installed in the United States Post Office at 
Chicago, Illinois. This order is one of the largest 
ever placed for one type of hardwood flooring to 
be installed in any one building. Approximately 
2.000,000 square feet of unit wood blocks will 
be used. 


The colossal effect of this one order may be 
realized upon reading the following statistical 
data, supplied by the Geo. H. Brown Hardware 
Company of Oakland, distributors of Cellized 
wood floor tile in Northern California. Imagine 
15,540 man-days being required for the manufac- 
ture of this single order. This is, as near as it 
can possibly be figured, the number required and 
that only for the manufacture complete and ready 
for shipment. There are an additional 4,350 man- 
days required for loading. shipping by rail and 
application, including sanding and finishing of the 
material. 


In explanation of these figures we sketch the 
following departments of the manufacturing pro- 
cedure: cutting the timber, hauling from the for- 
est to the log spur track, hauling from this point 
by rail to the mill, manufacture into lumber, yard 
storage and kiln-drying, manufacture into floor- 


119. and lastly, manufacture into blocks. The 
wood must first be turned into the regular strip 
type flooring before it is fabricated with the steel 
spline and cut to the size block desired. Even 
the man-hours required for mining and manufac- 
ture of the small steel splines, with which these 
blocks are fabricated. are included in the above 
ligures. They are still tremendous, coming to a 
tota! of 19,890 man-hours. The majority of this 
order requires a maple block of heavy thickness 
manufactured for use in areas where there will 
be much traffic. The entire order will amount to 
approximately 125 carloads. 


Cellized wood floor tile which meets the Gov- 
ernment specifications for “Unit Wood Blocks", 
in every detail, is an achievement of the E. L. 
Bruce Company, developed through the most ex- 
haustive research, supplemented by over five years 
of practical and successful experience. 


It will undoubtedly be of interest to Pacific 
Coast architects to know that many carload ship- 
ments of this flooring have been used in San Fran- 
cisco and Oakland, Portland, Oregon, Seattle, 
Washington, Los Angeles and other smaller cities 
on the Coast. 


Some of the above installations have contained 
from 46,000 to 60,000 feet per building. 


Entire Elevator Equipment | 


for the 


SAN FRANCISCO WAR 
MEMORIAL AND OPERA HOUSE 


furnished and installed by 


Spencer Elevator Company 


NOW 


Westinghouse Electric 
Elevator Company 


166-180 Seventh St. 


The Architect and Engineer. November, 1932 


MArke: 2500 


San Francisco 


73 


«««« Society and Club News » » » » 


OREGON CHAPTER, А. 1. A. 

The October meeting was held in the office 
of А. Е. Doyle and Associates, Portland, Ore- 
gon, those present being Messrs. Doty, Whitney, 
DeYoung, Sundeleaf, Herzog, Aandahl, Brook- 
man, Parker, Knighton, Howell, Forrest, Jacob- 
berger and Crowell. 

Linn Forrest, recent holder of the Ion Lewis 
Scholarship in Architecture, gave a screen talk 
on his experiences and impressions in Europe, 
covering the ground from Siciliy to Finland, and 
showing a collection of photographs, water colors, 
and pen and ink sketches. 

The meeting was called to order by President 
Doty. In the absences of Chairman Bean of the 
Building Laws Committee, Mr. Howell reported 
that considerable progress had been made, work- 
ing with a similar committee from the Registered 
Architects of Oregon, in formulating a State 
Building Code. 

Chairman Parker, of Public Works Committee, 
reported that there is considerable activity evident 
by those sponsoring a public market on the River 
front, and as requested by the Executive Commit- 
tee, he and Mr. Herzog had looked into the rela- 
tionship and conformity of the proposed site to 
the Bartholomew Plan. Mr. Herzog reported he 
had examined the text and maps of Bartholomew's 
report and was convinced that Bartholomew was 
opposed to the site east of Front Street, although 
he made no direct statement to that effect. 

A general discussion followed, during which 
the Chapter's letter to the Mayor and Council, 
dated Febrnary 19, 1930, was read and further 
correspondence between Mr. Doty and the Com- 
missioners of April, 1932, was quoted. 

It was moved by Mr. Herzog that the Public 
Works Committee, and the City and Regional 
Planning Committee be instructed to formulate 
suitable resolutions objecting to the market being 
located east of Front Street, same to be submitted 
to the Executive Committee which shall have the 
power to act. The motion was seconded by Mr. 
Knighton and passed without a dissenting vote. 

The meeting then adjourned to the draughting 
room where light refreshments were served. — 


W.H.C. 


WASHINGTON STATE CHAPTER 
Four business items and a water-color exhibit 
with lecture by a university student comprised the 
program at a busy session of the Washington 


74 


State Chapter, A. I. A., held at the New Wash- 
ington Hotel, Seattle, on Thursday evening, Octo- 
ber 6. President J. Lister Holmes of Seattle pre- 
sided. Twenty members were present. 

Kenneth Anderson and Perry Johanson, stu- 
dents in architecture at the University of Wash- 
ington, who spent the past summer traveling in 
Europe on a Fontainebleau scholarship, were spe- 
cial guests. Mr. Anderson exhibited 100 water- 
color sketches made during the trip, and related 
some amusing, as well as interesting incidents. 

Directors of the Washington Architects Inc. 
reported progress on the application for retainers 
with the U. S. Treasury Department at Wash- 
ington, D. C. 

'The structural service committee made a report 
on the advisability of requiring a bond for guar- 
anteed roofing. The Chapter is consulting William 
Gaines, superintendent of the Seattle city build- 
ing department, on making arrangements for re- 
turn of plans filed with the department pending 
the granting of permits. 


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA CHAPTER 

Members of the Southern California Chapter, 
American Institute of Architects, inspected the 
new Los Angeles county hospital building on Oc- 
tober 11. The tour of inspection was followed 
by the regular monthly meeting of the Chapter. 

Robert H. Orr, who was elected president of 
the State Association of California Architects at 
Del Monte, made a brief report on the convention. 

Notice was given of a meeting of the Producers' 
Council at the Engineers’ Club in the Richfield 
Oil Company building on October 28. 

A resolution was adopted extending the sym- 
pathy of the Chapter to A. M. Edelman who sus- 
tained a fracture of his right shoulder while in 
San Francisco. 

À paper on quantity survey was read by C. S. 
Weeks. 

Gordon B. Kaufmann, president of the Chap- 
ter, spoke on the new hospital as being an out- 
standing building, from both an architectural and 
construction standpoint, and congratulated the 
architects on their achievement. 


PROVISIONAL CERTIFICATES 
At a special meeting of the State Board of 
Architectural Examiners, Northern District, held 
on October 25, a Provisional Certificate was 
granted to David Hull Horn, 3016 Bateman 
Street, Berkeley. 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


MONEL METAL cris: sick: лу 


is the accepted material for soda fountains and lunch-room equipment, just as it 


is the universal metal for food service equipment in leading hotels and restau- 


rants throughout the country. 


CORROSIRON [Acid Resisting Iron | 


is the accepted material for draining waste lines. CORROSIRON meets all 
State and Municipal specifications for drain lines from school laboratories and 


chemistry rooms. 


Pacific Foundry Company Ltd. 
Pacific Metals Company Ltd. 


470 East Third St. 3100 Nineteenth St. 551 Fifth Ave. 
LOS ANGELES SAN FRANCISCO NEW YORK 


- 


Opera House of San 
Francisco War Memorial 
Group. (Raymond Gran- 
ite used in steps, plat- 
forms, base course, col 
umns, column bases and 
column caps in both 
Opera House and Veter- 
ans' Building.) 


Raymond Granite.... 


Enduring 55 the Sierra Nevadas 
> Нот whence it came. 


Matchless as Nature. 


California's Peerless Building Material 
san Francisco МССПУКАҮ RAYMOND CORPORATION 


LOS ANGELES 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 75 


76 


_ELEVATOR GUPPLIES [OMPANY, lac. | 


Main Office and Works 


HOBOKEN, М. J. 


ELEVATOR SIGNAL SYSTEMS 
FOR ALL TYPES OF 
BUILDINGS 


DOOR OPERATING EQUIPMENT 
ELEVATOR ACCESSORIES 


ELECTRIC DUMBWAITERS 


TELEVATORS AND 
TELEVEYORS 


STEEL FIREPROOF THEATER 
CURTAINS 


THEATER ORCHESTRA PLAT- 
FORM LIFTS 


SPECIAL PURPOSE MACHINERY 


MACHINERY FOR THE WIRE 
INDUSTRY 


Continuous Wire Drawing Machines 
High Speed Twisters 
Reelers and Spoolers 


Insulating Machines for: 
Silk, Cotton, Paper, Cellophane, 
Acetate. 


MONEL METAL WASHING 
MACHINES AND DRYING 
TUMBLERS 


PACIFIC COAST OFFICE 


186 Fifth Street San Francisco 


STATE ASSOCIATION 

The unification plan whereby state societies 
may become affiliated or corporate members of 
the American Institute of Architects, was ap- 
proved by the State Association of California 
Architects at the annual convention held at Del 
Monte October 7 and 8. The Association voted 
to become a “corporate member” and the execu- 
tive board was instructed to begin negotiations 
with the Institute to acquire such membership. It 
is possible that action on the application for mem- 
bership may be taken by the executive board of 
the Institute at its November meeting but if not, 
the matter will go over to the next meeting of 
the board which will be held probably in April, 
1933. 

Robert H. Orr of Los Angeles, was elected 
president of the State Association for the coming 
year. Harris C. Allen of San Francisco, was 
elected first vice-president; Louis ]. Gill San 
Diego, second vice-president. Ellsworth E. John- 
son, San Francisco, secretary; Lester H. Hibbard, 
Los Angeles, assistant secretary; William I. Gar- 
ren, San Francisco, treasurer; Harold E. Burket, 
Ventura, assistant treasurer. 

The 1933 convention probably will be held in 
Santa Barbara. 


PRODUCERS COUNCIL LUNCHEON 

Fifty-four architects and members of the Pro- 
ducer's Council Club met together for luncheon 
in the San Francisco Chamber of Commerce rooms 
on Monday, October 17th, G. R. Kingsland, gov- 
ernor of the Council, presiding, Г. W. Whitton, 
sales engineer of the Otis Elevator Company, 
gave a very interesting educational talk on “То- 
day's Problems in Vertical Transportation". He 
enlarged upon modernization, requirements of 
good elevator service, adequacy for traffic handl- 
ing and selection of proper elevator equipment. 
Lantern slides, followed by motion pictures, show- 
ing the arrangements and the handling of the 
traffic in the Le-High-Starrett Freight Terminal 
Building in New York, were a very interesting 
part of his address. The architects, as well as 
the members of the club, manifested keen interest 
in the subject. 


WASHINGTON STATE SOCIETY 

General discussion of plans for the coming 
year's activities occupied the attention of the first 
fall meeting of the Washington State Society of 
Architects October 13 at the Moore Hotel. Sec- 
ond Avenue and Virginia Street, Seattle. Presi- 
dent John S. Hudson had charge of the session. 
O. F. Nelson temporarily resumed his secretarial 
duties until a successor could be elected to suc- 
cecd Lawrence Hauser, who is going to Kodiak 
Island and Southwestern Alaska. 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON 

Onc hundred students are registered as majors 
in the Department of Architecture of the Uni- 
versity of Washington for 1932-33 semester. Har- 
lan Thomas, senior member of the firm of Thomas, 
Grainger and Thomas, continues as head of the 
department. Other full-time faculty members are: 
Lance E. Gowen, design; Lionel H. Pries, for- 
merly of San Francisco, design; Henry Olchew- 
sky, design; Charles W. May, engineering; S. I. 
Sergev, engineering; Raymond L. Hill, water- 
colors and sketches; Dudley Pratt, sculpture and 
modeling. Part time instructors are: Charles H. 
Alden, specifications and office practice; Merlin 
Hauan, plumbing and sanitation. 


ARCHITECTURE ON THE AIR 

An interesting talk on the profession of archi- 
tecture was broadcast over KPO, San Francisco. 
and KMTR, Los Angeles, on October 24, by Pro- 
fessor Warren С. Perry, director of the School 
of Architecture, University of California. 

Professor Perry has been actively engaged in 
professional practice in San Francisco for the past 
twenty years, has won many prizes for his archi- 
tectural designs, and has been a member of the 
University faculty for more than fifteen years. 

Describing the profession of architecture as 
it actually exists today, Professor Perry outlined 
the various phases of the vocation in its relation 
to conditions of life, its aesthetic side, its place in 
the economic scheme, and the ethics governing 
the best practice. 


LOS ANGELES FEDERAL BUILDING 

Plans for the new Federal office building in Los 
Angeles, prepared by John C. Austin, Frederic 
M. Ashley, John Parkinson and Donald B. Park- 
inson of Los Angeles, provide for a steel skeleton 
structure with eleven stories above ground on the 
site of the present Federal building in the Civic 
Center. The architectural treatment will be on 
modern lines, harmonizing with the other buildings 
in the Civic Center. The exterior will be faced 
with granite and terra cotta. Additional land pur- 
chased by the government gives a ground plot 
with 400 ft. frontage on Temple Street and 525 
ft. north along Spring Street. The new building, 
which will be known as the U. S. Postoffice and 
Courthouse, is planned to meet the needs of future 
expansion. There will be eight court rooms on the 
second and third floors and quarters for various 
government departments will be provided on the 
floors above. The estimated cost of the building 
is about $6,500,000. 


SALES MANAGER RESIGNS 
Morgan Р. Ellis has announced his resignation 
as general sales manager of Steel and Tubes, Inc. 
No announcement of future plans has been made 
as yet. 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


of Sheet Metal о” 


San Francisco War Memorial 


Buildings 


75 tons of lead-clad copper roof- 
ing, moulding, gutters, etc. 
22,000 sq. ft. of Pacific putty-less 
skylights 
52 Underwriter labeled fire doors 
Copper Kalemein marquise, 20’х 
200° with lead-coated deck 


GUILFOY CORNICE WORKS 
1234 HOWARD STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 


KALITE 


ACOUSTIC PLASTER 


AND 


ACOUSTIC STONE 


AS USED IN VARIOUS PARTS OF THE 
SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA 


WAR MEMORIAL 
OPERA HOUSE 


and 


VETERANS’ BUILDING 


SUPPLIED BY THE 


NORTHERN KALITE CO. 


DISTRIBUTORS FOR NORTHERN CALIFORNIA 


867 MILLS BUILDING 


SAN FRANCISCO, CALIF. 


77 


78 


Stage 
Equipment 
and 


Stage 


Draperies 


WAR MEMORIAL 
OPERA HOUSE AND 
VETERANS' 


BUILDING 


“World's Finest Stage 
Equipment" 


ww 


Dcsigned, Manufactured and 
Installed by 


S T А б Е 
EQUIPMENT 
STUDIOS 


FRED E. TURNER 
557 Market St., San Francisco 


PLASTERING 


Architectural Modeling 
and Ornamental Work 


Acoustical Plaster 
and Sound-Deadening 


for 


WAR MEMORIAL OPERA 
HOUSE 


and 


VETERANS BUILDING 


С. 


PETER BRADLEY 


Phone GArfeld 7369 


639 Brannan Street 


San Francisco 


A NOTABLE INSTALLATION 


The architects of the San Francisco War 
Memorial are to be commended for the manner in 
which they have planned the stage and orchestra 
lift equipment in the Opera House. The installa- 
tion is unique and outstanding for its complete- 
ness. 


The orchestra lift consists of one electric ele- 
vator in four individual sections in the main or- 
chestra pit, that may be raised and lowered in- 
dependently or together to four fixed levels or 
other intermediate stops. The mechanism for 
their operation is so timed as to permit synchro- 
nized elevation or descension. lt is intended at 
times to raise this lift in its entirety to the stage 
level to give greater area to the stage for classic 
productions. 


Four additional auxiliary orchestra elevators are 
provided in space normally occupied by two first 
rows of seats, and are arranged to serve different 
levels with view of increasing the size of space 
required for augmented orchestration. 


The stage presents an interesting arrangement, 
having upon it four scenery bridges, each 4/5 feet 
wide, 52 feet long. parallel to the proscenium 
opening. By the mere pressure of a push button, 
these bridges may be moved independently, or in 
synchronized groups, above or below the stage 
level; the object being to create steps and other 
scenic effects. When desirable to have these 
bridges form a level below the stage, provision 
Баз been made to draw mechanically, toward the 
center of stage, a train of sectional floor sliders 
reposing on guides in concealed pockets on either 
side of the stage proper, thus forming a floor upon 
stage in the space left by lowering of the respec- 
tive bridges. These sections are returned to their 
pockets when bridges are to resume travel up to 
or above the stage level. The operation is accom- 
plished by the momentary pressure of a push but- 
ton, and is entirely free of disconnecting or other 
time losing features. 


All operating mechanism for orchestra and aux- 
iliary elevators, the stage bridges and sectional 
floor trains are directed from a push button sta- 
tion located upon the stage adjacent to proscen- 
ium opening. The orchestra lifts are additionally 
provided with control from two of their sections. 


Twenty-nine stage traps, comprising an area of 
1,350 square feet, form part of the stage floor and 
are situated directly behind the stage bridges. 
These traps consist of guided platforms which 
can be raised to various heights up to 17 feet 
above the stage level. Another feature of these 
traps is that the platforms may be inclined to 
various angles while in raised position, thus 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


allowing unlimited means of creating additional 
scenic effects. 

А storage vault at the extreme rear of the 
stage contains racks for curtains, scenery, et cet- 
era. When a curtain or drop is not to be used 
for an indefinite period, it is lowered from its 
position, rolled up and placed upon a 75 foot long, 
screw driven, drop storage elevator. Push button 
control is the means provided for starting апа 
stopping the lift at the desired rack. 

The orchestra lifts, scenery bridges, sliders and 
drop storage elevator were furnished and installed 
by the Elevator Supplies Co., Inc. 


GEORGE PEDGRIFT 

George Pedgrift, widely known contracting 
plasterer in Southern California, died at his home, 
1852 W. Forty-second Place, Los Angeles, Oc- 
tober 15, after an illness of three weeks. Mr. 
Pedgrift had been active in association affairs for 
many years and was president of the Contracting 
Plasterers’ Association at the time of his death, 
his last tenure of the office having covered a period 
of ahout four years, For the last few years he had 
not heen active in business, devoting his time to 
private property interests. 


TWO COMPANIES MERGE 

Summerbel! Truss Company and the Trussless 
Roof Company of California have merged under 
the corporate name of Summerbell Roof Struc- 
tures. 

The new corporation is located at 754 E. 
Twenty-ninth Street, Los Angeles, with branch 
offices in Phoenix, San Diego, Oakland, Port- 
land and Seattle. 


GYMNASIUM AND RESIDENCE 
George Wellington Stoddard, Orpheum Build- 
ing, Seattle, is busy on several projects which in- 
clude a new gymnasium for the Moran Junior 
College on Bainbridge Island, and the addition to 
the E. M. Brennan residence at Woodway Park. 


CLUB BUILDING 
Miss Julia Morgan, architect in the Merchants 
Exchange Building, San Francisco, is preparing 
plans for a one-story frame and stucco club build- 
ing at San Luis Obispo for the Monday Club of 
that city. 


SAN JOSE THEATER 
Plans have been completed for a $20,000 frame 
theater at Willow Glen, a suburb of San Jose, for 
the Hester Theater Corporation of San Jose. 
Binder & Curtis are the architects. 


THEATER ALTERATIONS 
Bakewell © Weihe, architects, 251 Kearny 
Street, San Francisco, have awarded a contract 
for alterations to the interior of the Little Theater 
at 960 Bush Street, San Francisco. 


The Architect and Engineer, November. 1932 


THE CUTLER 
MAIL CHUTE 


TO INSURE standard, depend- 
able equipment installed prompt- 
ly at moderate cost, the Cutler 
Mail Chute should be specified 
by name. If desired, approxi- 
mate estimates will be furnished 
in advance. 


If preferred, a stated sum may 


be allowed to cover this item. 


Full information on request. 


PRICE BUILDING SPECIALTIES, 

San Francisco, California 
CONTINENTAL BUILDING SPECIALTIES, Inc. 
Los Angeles, California 

D. E. FRYER & COMPANY, С. М. BOOST, 
Seattle, Washington Portland, Oregon 
FRYER-FORD COMPANY, 
Spokane, Washington 


CUTLER MAIL CHUTE CO. 


General Offices and Factory 
ROCHESTER, NEW YORK 


Nu-Art Anti-Squirt 
Drinking Fountain 
Head 


IDDIES cannot squirt 

this bubbler! The orifice 
is well protected by the 
guard which absolutely pre- 
vents the possibility of 
touching same with the lips. 
Foreign matter from the 
mouth cannot fall on the 
orifice—fingers cannot touch 
16. 


Model R-2 


Every salutary feature is in- 
corporated in this bubbler— 
and the design is based upon 
the recognized rhythm of 
modern art. 


HAWS M 


SANITARY DRINKING FAUCET CO. 
1808 Harmon Street, Berkeley 


79 


80 


An Architectural Classic.... 


War 


Memorial 
Group 


San Francisco 


Artuur Brown, Jn. Architect 


Geo. А. LanssurGH, Collaborating Architect 


Managers of 


Construction 


Lindgren & Swinerton, Inc. 
Standard Oil Building 


San Francisco 


Complete 
the Circle of Protection 


LIFE INSURANCE 
plus 
LIFE INSURANCE TRUST 


Life insurance is good—a is an arrangement be- 


man should take out all 
he can afford. But don't 
stop there. Remember— 
life insurance provides 
money—but ло! the abil- 
ity to manage it. 


'The Life Insurance Trust 
fills this lack — completes 
the circle of protection. И 


Wells Fa 


and 


nion 


tween you and the bank 
providing for the collec- 
tion and investment of 
your life insurance estate, 
the payment of income to 
your dependents, and the 
final disbursement of 


principal, all exactly as 
you direct. Call or write 
for details. 


TRUST DEPARTMENT 


rgo Bank 
]rust Co. 


Since 1852 


Two Offices: 
Market at Montgomery and 
Market at Grant Avenue 


SAN FRANCISCO 


CONTRACTING—A VERSATILE 
BUSINESS 


“The most versatile of all business is contract- 
ing. Certainly the most fascinating and far reach- 
ing. There is no repetition, no duplication, and 
no imitation, try as we may. No two jobs were 
ever done exactly alike, even though both were 
from the same plan and specifications. Jobs may 
be similar but never alike. So that in the business 
of contracting we must find versatile men, men 
of imagination and vision, and men of experi- 
ence," said B. Е. Meinecke, contractor of Fargo, 
North Dakota, in an address at the recent meet- 


ing of the Associated Contractors of North 
Dakota. 


“The natural contractor is not made, he is 
born that way. He is born under a lucky star, 
and rocked in the cradle of optimism, reared under 
benign influences of a wonderful growing world, 
and taught in the arts and crafts of a generous 
nation till he arrives at maturity to blossom forth 
as a contractor. 


“Up to this time, certainly, there have been 
none but enervating and elevating influences sur- 
rounding him of the nature and kind which have 
helped to shape his future destiny. Indeed all his 
surroundings which have worked on him, have 
had an influence for good, have imparted knowl- 
edge and experience and have fitted him for his 
struggle of the future. All his life he has been 
taught to view the future with a friendly eye, and 
to look upon what is ahead with a spirit of optim- 
ism. His entire make-up is fashioned along these 
lines, and it is safe to say that ninety-nine out 
of every hundred contractors are optimists — at 
least up to the time they land a job. Really, I can- 
not see how anyone can follow contracting suc- 
cessfully unless he carries this same spirit right 
through his entire organization, because if a job 
once starts going wrong, and a fellow starts slid- 
ing, all the skids will be well greased for the 
occasion. 


"When the old age-worn question is now 
asked of us, 'How's business, it will not require 
a modern philosopher, who is quick on the trigger 
to say 'it's rotten, rather may we not readily 
reply in the spirit of optimism, ‘it’s not so bad.’ 
It may not be brisk, but any business which we 
may have at all, certainly could be cailed ‘good,’ 
and leave a pleasant taste in our own mouth after- 
wards. 


"There is absolutely nothing to be gained in 
talking down-heartedly or in spreading the spirit 
of gloom, because gloom leads to despair and 
despair to annihilation. 


"Now let us see if we can find in contracting 
perhaps some of the excuses or reasons responsible 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


for our present state of depression. Is it not pos- 
sible that we as contractors may have contributed 
our share, and rather liberally at that, towards 
our present situation? It may be a long story to 
clearly trace this, and we may be at fault in our 
deductions, but we are going to present them not 
as our individual views alone, but as the views 
of men vitally interested in contracting. 

"During well regulated and so-called prosper- 
ous periods, when general business is at its best, 
and all industries are operating on an over-time 
basis, producing goods beyond the normal con- 
sumption, the contractor has his inning. He se- 
cures his contracts, in common with the accepted 
usages, at a price for all the traffic will bear. This 
does not seem to any of us to be unfair and 
unjust, in the trend of modern business. What 
happens? To many there appears to be no end 
to such bounty, and in our greed for business we 
go the limit. By limit, I mean, permitting every- 
thing all the way down the line to be done which 
has a definite tendency to increase costs to such 
a point that it becomes impossible and confisca- 
tory, and people will openly rebel against high 
costs and refuse to build. Investment banks or 
bonding houses withdraw their support and our 
whole structure of contracting must tumble and 
deflate till we all get back to fundamentals. These 
terribly inflated construction wage schedules must 
come back to normalcy and labor must accept its 
share of the burden of correction. 

"Other evils must be divorced from the con- 
struction industry, and we all must get back to 
fundamentals if we are going to obtain a speedy 
return to normalcy. 

"| shall be criticized by men of our fraternity 
for many of my remarks. | expect that, | only 
ask that those who disagree weigh these matters 
in the scale of their consciences before con- 
demning. 

“There is no industry which reacts so quickly 
to any outside interference as contracting. There 
is only one other industry which is larger than 
contracting in all its ramifications, and naturally 
a very large proportion of our population is de- 
pendent on it for a livelihood. In a large portion 
of the country, especially this northwest section it 
is seasonal, and though it can be done, many 
classes of winter construction are expensive in 
spite of the fact that perhaps cheaper labor may 
be had. 

"Any figures that may be obtained, however. 
at this particular stage should not be regarded 
as a criterion of prevailing prices. Especially dur- 
ing periods of stagnation or depression, many 
prices are made simply for the purpose of main- 
taining organizations together, and many a con- 
tractor figures work dangerously low, depending 
on volume of business and on buying powers to 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


SPECIFY 


BAY STATE 


BRICK AND CEMENT COATING 


. the coating your client 
will thank you for specifying. 
It offers high resistance to 
moisture and other destruc- 
tive influences and yet en- 
hances the beauty of the 
building . . . It is Proven! 


Manufactured by America's oldest corpora- 
tion for over thirty years. 


CALIFORNIA SALES CO., INC. 


Distributors 


us San Francisco 
7 Front Street 
Soo SUtter 8854 


THE BAY STATER 


Stanley 
Ball Bearing Hinges 


FOR smooth, trouble-free operation of 
doors for the life of the building. 


You will find our "Architect's Man- 
val of Stanley Hardware” very 
useful in making up hardware 
specifications. 


Send for a copy. 


THE STANLEY WORKS 
New Britain, Conn. 
SAN FRANCISCO 
576 Monodnock Bldg.| 


LOS ANGELES 
1202 Washington Bldg. 


SEATTLE 
501 Moynord Bldg. 


81 


Metal Stairease 


Pipe and Iron Railing 


In the New San Francisco Opera House 
and Veterans’ Building 


ч 
Furnished and Installed Бу 


MONARCH IRON WORKS 


Established 1910 


262 Seventh Sireet, San Francisco 


E are justly proud of the 
beauty of our marble installa- 


Marble combines three essential fac- 
tors in construction—beauty—perm- 
anence—utility. 


EISELE & DONDERO 
MARBLE CO. 


San Francisco, Calif, 


2895 Third Street Mission 3060 


All Electric Work on the San Fran- 
cisco War Memorial Group, together 
with Electrical Stage Equipment in 
Opera House by 


Alta Electric and Mechanical 
Company, Inc. 


467 O'Farrell Street, San Егапєіѕео 
Telephone ORdway 2166 


4000 OPERA CHAIRS 


In the San Francisco 
War Memorial Group 
furnished by 
К 
Атегісап Seating Company 


650 Second Street 
San Francisco 


82 


tion in the new 
SAN FRANCISCO OPERA HOUSE 


make his profit. This is deplorable, as every man 
should be worthy of his hire, and every sub-con- 
tractor should be permitted to make a profit. 


"'This depression, if we want to grace it by 
that name, must come to an end, as they all have 
in the past, and while we are not saying that 
prosperity is just around the corner, we most cer- 
tainly believe it is. We are going to tell every- 
body this at any rate, and we are going to radiate 
it and live it and talk it in our own way. And 
we hope and trust it may become contagious and 
keep on spreading from Minot to Fargo, and 
Fargo to Minneapolis and on to Chicago and 
New York, and Miami and New Orleans, and 
Seattle and San Francisco, and that the spirits of 
optimism will again prevail, and that the clouds 
of despair may be pushed out of the way to reveal 
their silver lining. 

"We can make anything come true if we sin- 
cerely want it, and if we all live it, and all go 
after it at the same time, and everything we do 
be done for the purpose of obtaining our goal. 


"Believe me, we have the best ally in the world 
to help us, in our good friend Uncle Sam, and 
while we do not believe it is possible to legislate 
prosperity, yet we do believe that an all-powerful 
influence brought to bear on this particular in- 
dustry by the United States in numerous construc- 
tion activities, is going to have a mighty stimulat- 
ing and stabilizing effect, and is going to help 
carry a lot of people through the present crisis. 

"People would be wise to choose the present 
time to make alterations, changes or additions, as 
work is being done at a reduction of fully 25 per 
cent below the peak prices of several years ago." 


SCREENS FOR BOMBING BASE 


Bates-Carpenter Co., distributors of building 
materials, with headquarters at 557 Market Street, 
San Francisco, have been awarded the contract 
for the screens for the first unit of the И. S. Army 
bombing base now under construction at Hamil- 
ton Field, Marin county. These screens are all 
of tubular metal construction. 


STORE BUILDING CONTRACT 
Н. A. Minton, architect, 525 Market Street. 
San Francisco. has awarded a contract for $8,100 
for the construction of a one-story reinforced 
concrete store building at Palo Alto for the Capi- 
tol Company. 


STORE ALTERATIONS 


Claude B. Barton, architect of Oakland, has 
prepared plans for extensive alterations to a two- 
story store building on 20th Street, Oakland, for 
the Ruud Heater Company. 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


ARCHITECTURAL CRITICISM 
Bu HzNzv 5. Снияснит in Pencil Points 


Architectural criticism has been. as Mr. Ander- 
son ported out. mostly by specialists in other 
fields. Tamne rurned architecture into history. as 
Ruslan turned и into. ethics and as Mr. Mumford 
rns it into sociology. Every specialist interprets 
an art mto terms and service of his specialty. But 
the reverse is also true 1f not so commonplace. and 
that 1s that with the collapse of architecture as an 
art the architects have been trying to turn sociol- 
ogy into architecture. engineering into architec- 
ture busimess into archsiecture. Now this is per- 
fectly legitimate. but it isn t. wasn't. and wont be 

rchitecture аа the great historic sense of the word. 


IN NEW QUARTERS 


The Aha Electric © Mechanical Equipmen: 
Company. lnc. has moved into new quarters at 
467 O'Farrell Street. San Francisco. Executive 
offices and darfting room are on the second floor. 
This firm recently completed a contract for all 
the electnca] work for the War Memorial group 
in the San Francisco Civic Center, including the 
electrical stage equipment in the Opera House. 
The пех! big contract 10 be undertaken by this 
firm wil be the electrical] work on the Golden 
Gate Bridge. 


BOOKLET ON WINDOWS 


Custis Companies of Clinton. lowa. through 
their Service Bureau. have recently issued a verv 
interesting booklet describing in detail their new 
Silenute рге-Ё windows. This booklet. although 
written and illustrated in a somewhat humorous 
vein, 15 most informative and delves into the his- 
tory of window covering a period of 3300 vears. 
It is suggested that this data is of decided value 
to every architect and builder. Copies may be 
obtained from the home office of the company on 
request. 


CITY PLANNING CONFERENCE 

The twenty-fourth National Conference on City 
Planning wil] be held in Pittsburg. Pa.. November 
14. 15. and 16. The Buhl Foundation, of Рїїї<- 
burgh. and the civic organizations interested in 
planning. are sponsoring the invitation 10 the Con- 
ference. 

There wil] be a most determined effort in the 
program to make a frontal attack on the mistaken 
municipal economy which has in manv instances 
cnppled. or entirely eliminated the loca! planning 
programs. 


The Archtect and Engineer November. 1932 


AC HE BROWN > 


ON 


% 


1044-1058 Forty-seventh Avenue 
OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 
Telephone: FR uitvale 8305-8306 


CALIFORNIA SHADE CLOTH CO. 
1710 San Bruno Avenue, San Francisco 


Manufacturers of 
QUALITY HAND MADE SHADE CLOTH 
IN ALL GRADES 


Wholesale Distributors 


SLOANE-BLABON LINOLEUM 


“a Pump Governors 
87 Safety Pump Governors 
Automatic Gas Regulat- 
24 ing Valves 
ги Саз Burners 
X Oy Gas Burning Equipment Oil Pumping Sets 
ы, Vacuum Pump Gevernors ОП Valves 
тым. Vacuum Regulating 


тез 
Continuous Flow Steam 


qs Duplex Oil Pampa 


Rotary ОП Pumps 
Thermostats 2 
Бедәсіпе Valves Boiler Feed Pumps 
Boiler Feed-W алет Water Heaters 
Regulators Oil Meters 


VAUGHN -G. E. WITT CO., Engineers 
C. Ж. VAUGHN, President and Manager 
MANUFACTURERS AND DISTRIBUTORS 


4224-25 Hollis St. Phene OL »mpic 6084 
Emerrrille, Oakland, Calif. 


REINFORCING Steel 2nd Accessones 
MEDUSA Whre Cement. and Cemeai Paint 
САВОТ`$ Stam:. СӘйеракге. Waterproot- 
ing. Insulannge Quilt 
DURAFLEX Floonng and Tile 
DUPLEX-KRAUSE Incinerator: 
NENETLAN Window Bhnd: 


GUNN. CARLE & CO. 


San Francisco UNderhill 5580 


20 Potrero Ave. 


The new Decatur 
De Luxe Lavatory, 
illustrated here, is 
representative of 
the MUELLER 
line of quality vit- 
reous china. 


MUELLER CO. 
Decatur, Ill. 
San Francisco Branch: 
1072-76 Howard St. 


The Modern Way— 
BUILD WITH STEEL 


Protect your Investment from 
Fire and Quake 
Structural Steel for Buildings 
and Bridges 


JUDSON-PACIFIC CO. 


609 MISSION STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 
DOuglas 4460 


Plants, San Francisco and Oakland 


MARBLE CLASS 


A new decorative building material of 

exceptional beauty—looks like genuine 

marble with its innumerable delicate 
veins and royal colors. 


Г For New and Remodeled Build- 
Ct ings, Store Fronts, Hotel Lobbies, 1 


Office Buildings, Vestibules, Etc. 


MacGRUER & COMPANY 


266 Tehama Street San Francisco 


W.8 J. SLOANE 


Established 1843 


RUGS : CARPETS 
LINOLEUMS 
WINDOW SHADES 
Phone; GArfield 2827 
FURNITURE 


DRAPERIES 
Estimates Gladly Submitted 


216-228 SUTTER STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 


DAMS IN CALIFORNIA 
By Epwanp Hyatt, State Engineer 

The Department of Public Works, through the 
State Engineer, has been charged since 1929 with 
the responsibility of approval of plans and sup- 
ervision of construction and maintenance of all 
dams in California above a minimum size. At the 
present time and during the last year the main 
activity in the building of new dams has been in 
Southern California. 

Including dams which will soon be started, 
dams under construction and dams recently com- 
pleted, there will be added to the water storage 
in Southern California about 387,000 acre-feet at 
an approximate cost of $31,904,000. 

Before construction of a dam can be started, 
plans and specifications must be approved by the 
State Engineer, who also supervises construction 
from start to finish, and when the structure is 
completed, issues a certificate of approval, certi- 
fying that the dam is safe. The tendency in dam 
building is to design higher structures of greater 
storage capacity, which results in greater poten- 
tial menace than was the case a decade ago when 
smaller dams were the rule. 

The responsibility resting upon the state office 
in approving the design and supervising construc- 
tion of new dams as well as passing upon those 
already built is very great, as it may result in 
increasing the cost to the owners in large amounts, 
and may even cause abandonment of a dam on 
which much money has been expended; but more 
important it means that the state office must 
undertake the grave duty of assuring people liv- 
ing below a dam and the public generally that all 
reasonable safeguards have been observed in its 
construction and that lives and property will not 
be jeopardized thereby. 

The great dam building program under way 
in Southern California may be called a three-phase 
plan. First, it will conserve a vital natural re- 
source; second it will protect lives and property 
from destructive floods; and third it will mate- 
rially help the critical unemployment problem by 
putting many thousands of men to work on nec- 
essary public improvements. In reviewing appli- 
cations and plans for dams which require large 
expenditures and employment of many men the 
state office has cooperated with the owners to 
clear the way for construction at the earliest date 
possible in order to reach the unemployment prob- 
lem quickly and effectively. 

Water is the first consideration in the economic 
development and continued prosperity of Southern 
California. This section of the State with a popu- 
lation of two and one-quarter million people, com- 
prises ten per cent of the irrigable area of the 
entire state and fifty per cent of the state's popu- 


The Architect and Engincer, November, 1932 


lation. The water resources of Southern California 
are only 1.4 per cent of the total resources of the 
state and if wholly conserved are insufficient to 
fully meet future requirements without develop- 
ment of water from other sources. The control and 
conservation of the surface flow of Southern Cali- 
fornia streams are imperative to meet the ever 
increasing demands for municipal purposes, irri- 
gation uses and to afford protection against re- 
curring devastating floods. 


Four major dams have been completed in South- 
ern California within the last year, and applica- 
tions for six have been recently approved and 
construction is either under way or is expected 
to start soon. Several are for the dual purpose of 
flood control and conservation; others are primar- 
ily For conservation with small flood control value. 


Plans for San Gabriel No. 1 dam have just been 
approved. This is the largest dam to be built by 
the Los Angeles County Flood Control District, 
and will be located in San Gabriel Canyon about 
two miles below the Forks. It will cost about ten 
million dollars and be the largest rockfill dam in the 
world, containing about five million cubic yards 
of rock. (The largest rockfill dam at present is 
also in California—the Salt Springs dam of the 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company.) 


REGISTERED CONTRACTORS 
Colonel Carlos W. Huntington, registrar of 
contractors, announces publication of the new 
1932-33 official list of registered contractors. 


The book contains not only the official list of 
licensed contractors in California, but a reprint 
of the contractor's license law and a brief discus- 
sion of the functions of the contractors division of 
the State Department of Professional and Voca- 
tional Standards. It also contains important in- 
formation concerning the various state laws regu- 
lating contractors, which is of vital interest to all 
those closely allied to the construction industry. 


The directory will be supplemented at regular 
periods with lists of additional licenses issued, as 
well as notices of suspensions, revocations and re- 
instatements. 


Those desiring a copy or copies of the publica- 
tion may write to the Registrar of Contractors at 
Sacramento. 


DOUBLE VALUE 
"Which is the most valuable—a five-dollar gold 
piece or a five-dollar bill?" 
“The bill, because when you put it in your 
pocket you can double it." 
"Right. And when you take it out you find it 
in creases.” 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


ARCHITECTS, We Specialize in 
SOUND CONTROL 
and 
Insulation Materials 


Е. К. WOOD LUMBER СО. 
Lumber and Millwork 


SAN FRANCISCO - OAKLAND - LOS ANGELES 


Recent Contracts Completed — 


FORD ASSEMBLY PLANTS AT 
SEATTLE, LONG BEACH 
AND RICHMOND 


Clinton Construction Company 
of California 


Builders and Managers 


of Construction 


923 FOLSOM STREET SAN FRANCISCO 
Telephone SUtter 3440 


WALKER - WILKESON 
SANDSTONE 


Sawed Stone 
Building Stone Rip Rap 


The Nation's Finest Stone 
HOYT M. LESHER 
California Representative 


503 Market St., San Francisco 
'Telephone: DOuglas 6436 


Walker Cut Stone 
Plant: Tacoma, Wash. 


Quarries at 
Wilkeson, Wash. 


KAWNEER 


MODERNISTIC CONSTRUCTION 
FOR 


TODAY’S STORE FRONT 


Through years of experience Kawneer 
craftsmen have acquired the art of ren- 
dering in metal distinctive and efficient 
store fronts of any size or design. 


KAWNEER MFG. CO. 


BERKELEY CALIFORNIA 


85 


Gladding Bros. 
Mfg. Co. 


BURNED CLAY PRODUCTS 
ROOF TILE 
COMMON AND FACE BRICK 
FLOOR TILE 
VITRIFIED SEWER PIPE 
DRAIN TILE 
CHIMNEY PIPE 
FLUE LINING 


PLANT AND OFFICE: 
THIRD AND KEYES STREETS 
Ballard 7570 San Jose, Calif. 


ce 
ү?” 
BOILERS 


for 
Every Purpose 


637 Minna Street, San Francisco, Calif. 
Phone: MArket 3612 


AMERICAN 


MARBLE 
COMPANY 


Office and Factory 
Swift Ave. and Canal 
P. O. Box 578 
South San Francisco, Calif. 
SUttcr 2840 South San Francisco 161 


JOSEPH MUSTO 
SONS-KEENAN 
COMPANY 


MARBLE 


and 
ONYX 


535 NORTH POINT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


1801 S. SOTO STREET 
LOS ANGELES 


86 


STEEL FLOORS 

Fireproofing, strength and sound 
conductivity tests being made by 
the U. S. Bureau of Standards, 
indicate that steel floors will make 
a marked contribution to the art 
of building bridges and buildings. 
This was attested to by Е. Н. 
Frankland, Director of Engineer- 
ing Service of the American In- 
stitute of Steel Construction, in an 
address before the tenth annual 
convention of the Institute held in 
Pittsburgh, Pa., last month. 


Мг. Frankland said: 


The fire and load tests of steel 
floors carried on for the Institute 
by the Bureau of Standards at 
Washington include the first fire 
tests of steel floors on record. The 
work under this program com- 
menced in January, 1930, the first 
test was run in February, 1931, 
being followed by eleven other 
tests up to the end of September, 
1932. Tests 13 and 14 should be 
completed by the end of Novem- 
ber and the data collected during 
the three years' work will then be 
ready, when an appropriation to 
cover the cost is made available 
by the Institute, to collate, analyze 
and incorporate in the final offi- 
cial report of the Bureau. 


The detailed results of the first 
cleven tests have been distributed 
to our membership in the form of 
preliminary reports, and the re- 
sults from the three remaining 
tests will be made available as 
soon as they are received from 
the Bureau of Standards and mim- 
cographed for distribution. 


The program of tests was div- 
ided into two main sections, the 
first six tests were designed to ob- 
tain data from fire applied from 
above the floor, without fireproof- 
ing and with materials of vary- 
ing fire-resistive qualities used as 
floor coverings. The second sec- 
tion of tests was for the purpose 
of obtaining data on the fire re- 
sistance of the steel floor with fire 
applied from below against ceil- 
ings of various types and degrees 
of fire resistance. In addition tests 


Draughting & Engineering 
Service, Inc. 


654 Mission St. 
San Francisco 


Phone: 
SUtter 1286 


ENGINEERS— 
Consulting 
echanical 
Electrical 
“Theatres our Specialty” 


CHAS. STOCKHOLM 
& SONS 


Contractors 


Russ Building, San Francisco 


Phone DO uglas 4420 


Del Monte 
WHITE SAND 
Fan Shell - Beach 


WASHED IN FRESH WATER 
DRIED BY STEAM 
CLEAN BONE DRY 


evo 


Del Monte Properties Company 
Phone GArfield 4533 


401 Crocker Building San Francisco 


Specify 


DICKEY 
CLAY 
PRODUCTS 


Dickey Mastertile Face Brick 


Partition Tile Fire Brick 
Drain Tile Paving Brick 
Fireproofing Tile Wall Coping 
Floor Tile Flue Lining 


Common Brick Dickey Flashing Blocka 


W. S. DICKEY CLAY MFG. 


COMPANY 
SAN FRANCISCO 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


McClintic-Marshall 
Corporation 


Subsidiary of ран Steel 


тн 
Bethlehem НЩ Corporation 


STEEL BRIDGES 
and BUILDINGS 


215 WEST SIXTH STREET 
LOS ANGELES 


2050 BRYANT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


A Thatched Roof in 
California Redwood 


A life time House Covering 
combining Beauty and 
Durability 


Manufaciured by 
HOLMES EUREKA 
LUMBER COMPANY 


947 Monadnock Huilding, San Francisco 


Hondled by Established Retoil Distributors 


ARMCO 


Special Analysis 
Iron and Steel 

Sheets and Plates 

For Building Construction 
e 
THE AMERICAN ROLLING MILL CO. 

540 Tenth Street, San Francisco 

Phone: MArket 3495 
32 W. Conneclicut Street, Seatile 


сш Specify Armco Sheets and 
RM Platea for all purposes 
where durable, fiuely- 
finished construction is 

required. 


TRANSIT-MIX 
CONCRETE 


A Perfect-Blend 


Material 


Golden Gate Atlas 
Materials Co. 


Sixteenth and Harrison Streets 
San Francisco 
Phone HEmlock 7020 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


Nos. 13 and 14 will include fire 
hose tests in order to satisfy the 
requirements of the National 
Board of Fire Underwriters and 
various building codes, including 
the Recommended Standard Build- 
ing Code of the Department of 
Commerce. 


In fire tests of steel floors the 
criterion of protection is the abil- 
ity of the fireproofing to resist 
temperatures set on the standard 
time-temperature curve, for the 
periods specified, without permit- 
ting any part of the load bearing 
stcel to reach a temperature in ex- 
cess of 1000? F, which is the max- 
imum temperature at which fire- 
proofed structural steel will safely 
carry the allowable design stresses. 
Also an additional criterion is the 
ability of the floor construction, 
with its fireproofing, to resist the 
transmission of heat from below 
so that the surface floor tempera- 
tures above do not exceed 300? 
E—this in order that combustible 
material on the floor of one room 
shall not become ignited by heat 
transmitted from the room below. 

А report on the strength tests 
made at the Bureau of Standards 
has been distributed by the Insti- 
tute to its membership. There yet 
remains, however, a series of 
sound conductivity tests of the 
steel floor to be made by the Bur- 
eau when the Institute has avail- 


able funds. 


It should be understood that the 
results from these fire tests apply 
to all steel floors where steel is 
the load carrying material. 


CALIFORNIA HIGHWAYS 

The architectural section of the 
Commonwealth Club of California 
has completed a report on the ap- 
pearance of highways in the State. 
The report was submitted to the 
members October 20, at the Elks' 
Club, San Francisco. 

'The section, headed by lrving 
F. Morrow, who is consulting 
architect to Joseph B. Strauss on 
the Golden Gate bridge, has gone 
into the complete problem of the 


YOUNG 
& 
HORSTMEYER 


GENERAL 


CONTRACTORS 


461 Market Street 
San Francisco 
Phone SUller 6257—58 


Раш B. Young А. L. Horstmeyer 


RAY COOK 
MARBLE CO. 


IMPORTED AND DOMESTIC 
MARBLES 


For Building Construction 


Factory and Office: 
FOOT OF POWELL 8T., OAKLAND 
Phone Pledmont 1009 


$ 


MERCURY PRESS 


We Print 
The ARCHITECT and 
ENGINEER 


“A Thing of Beauty 
Is a Joy Forever” 


942 HOWARD STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


Grinnell Automatic 
SPRINKLER 


GRINNELL COMPANY 
OF THE PACIFIC 
ENGINEERS AND 
CONTRACTORS 


VALVES, PIPE and FITTINGS 
CHEMICAL FIRE EXTINGUISHERS 
and FIRE ENGINES 
Fifth and Brannan Streets 


San Francisco 


Phone DOuglas 1120-1121 


Larsen and Larsen 


General Contractors 


ww 


629 BRYANT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


FORDERER 
CORNICE WORKS 


Copper Roofs 
Galvanized Iron Work 
Elevator Doors 


269 Potrero Avenue, San Francisco 
Phone HEmleck 4109 


Robert W. Hunt Company 
ENGINEERS 
Inspection - Tests - Consultation 
Inspection and Tests of Structural 
Steel, Reinforcing Steel 
and Cement. 

Field Inspection and Supervision 
of Consruction of Steel and 
Concrete Structures. 
Cement, Concrete, Chemical, Met- 
allurgical, X-Ray and Physical 
Laboratories. 

Chicago - New York - Pittsburgh 
All Large Cities 
San Francisco, 251 Kearny Street 


Chicago 


HOSPITAL 


SILENT CALL 
SIGNAL SYSTEMS 


GARNETT YOUNG AND CO. 
Pacific Coast Salea Engineers 

390 FOURTH ST. SAN FRANCISCO 

Seattle Los Angeles Portland 


esthetic considerations of high- 
ways. 


The recommendations of the 
section report contain the follow- 
ing: 

1—It is our conviction that 
every road-building agency should 
contain in its organization a land- 
scape architect familiar also with 
highway work, in a position of 
authority wherein his counsel will 
have weight and his plans be con- 
sidered in a manner similar to 
those of the designing engineer. 


He should be intimately associ- 
ated with every road project from 
the beginning of reconnaissance in 
the field, through all the phases of 
the design, construction and main- 
tenance. We recommend this pol- 
icy to the consideration of all pub- 
lic road-building agencies. Їп na- 
tional park work this practice is 
already їп effect between the 
United States Bureau of Public 
Roads and the National Park 
Service itself, with admirable re- 
sults. 


2—The California State Divi- 
sion of Highways should be em- 
powered to acquire rights of way 
in any widths requisite for mod- 
ern standards of road design, in- 
cluding parkways, and should be 
enabled to provide picnic grounds 
and other stopping places as part 
of its highway program. 


3—The United States mining 
law should be amended to separ- 
ate mineral and surface rights in 
land, thereby preventing on public 
lands the use of fraudulent min- 
ing claims to obstruct highway de- 
velopment and the control of 
marginal property in the interests 
of appearance. 


4—-Power should be granted to 
the State and counties by statute 
for the acquisition of scenic ease- 
ments or partial rights in land 
where protection is desirable but 
acquisition of title unnecessary. 


The Commonwealth report is 
the composite work of architects, 
engineers, landscape architects, 
and traffic experts. 


ВЕС. U. S. РАТ. OFF. 


*More than a 


building paper" 


THE SISALKRAFT CO, 
205 West Wacker Drive 
(Canal Station) Chicago, Ill, 
55 New Montgomery Street 
San Francisco, Calif, 


CRANE 


High Class Plumbing 
Fixtures 


ww 


ill in 


ALL PRINCIPAL Coast CITIES 


THE TORMEY 


COMPANY 


GENERAL PAINTERS 
AND DECORATORS 


Phone WA lnut 3639 


563 FULTON STREET 


San Francisco 


W. H. PICARD, Inc. 


PLUMBING, HEATING, 
VENTILATING and 
POWER PLANTS 


5656 College Avenue 
5662 Keith Avenue 


California 
Phones PI edmont 9004-9005 


Oakland 


The Architect and Enginccr, November, 1932 


OcEAN SHORE 


IRON WORKS 


550-558 EIGHTH STREET 
MA rket 0462-0463 


San Francisco California 


4%, 
% 
STEAM BOILERS 
STEEL TANKS 


SMOKE STACKS 
e WATER » 
е HEATERS eœ 


LUXOR 


WINDOW SHADES 


Translucent Shading 
of highest count 
cambric 


William Volker & Co. 


631 Howard Street 
San Francisco 


CLERVI 
MARBLE CO. 


MANUFACTURING CONTRACTORS 


Fereign and Domestic 
Marbles 
Interior & Exterior Buildings 


Office & Mill, 1721 San Bruno Ave. 


Phone MI seion 6625 
SAN FRANCISCO, CAL. 


The Architect and Engincer, Novembcr, 1932 


LOANS FOR HOUSING 

States and cities are moving to 
expedite low cost housing and 
slum clearance with the aid of the 
Reconstruction Finance Corpora- 
tion, according to the American 
Engineering Council. A national 
movement to encourage state ас- 
tion is gaining ground, and the 
disbursement by the Corporation 
of hundreds of millions of dollars 
to promote self-liquidating enter- 
prises of this character seems as- 
sured, says a statement by the 
Council, which is co-operating 
with the Corporation in an effort 
to accelerate the granting of loans 
involving the field of engineering. 

New York, by establishing a 
State Housing Board, is the first 
to comply with the provision of the 
Emergency Relief and Construc- 
tion Act under which the Corpor- 
ation can make loans to “согрог- 
ations formed wholly for the pur- 
pose of providing houses for fam- 
ilies of low incomes, or for recon- 
struction of slum areas, which are 
regulated by state or municipal law 
as to rents, charges, capital struc- 
ture, rate of return, and areas and 
methods of operation.” 


The non-existence of an ap- 
propriate local regulatory author- 
ity, save in New York State, is the 
chief barrier to the financing with 
Federal assistance of a huge hous- 
ing program employing large num- 
bers of men and a vast amount 
of materials, the engineers de- 
clare. Concerted effort by engi- 
neers, architects, the building in- 
dustry, and civic groups is grad- 
ually surmounting this difficulty, 
and the release of funds, soon to 
begin, is expected to acquire a 
momentum which will powerfully 
influence business revival. 

Ohio, Illinois, Massachusetts, 
Indiana, and Pennsylvania have 
organized committees to bring 
about legislative action which will 
enable private building corpora- 
tions to borrow from the Corpor- 
ation. Chicago, Cleveland, Cin- 
cinnati, Boston, and San Fran- 
cisco, in addition to New York 
City, are centers of this activity. 

The first loans for housing and 


mem " 
% N h 
The FE 
AMAN sS WSA 
МЕ 
3 N Y N 


NK 
г. SAN W 


d LE R Co. 
х етот с`бомтийстояв 


COMPLETE ASTALLATIONS 


| БТОВЕ `ВАМК- "RESTAURANT - OFFICE | 


-PIXTURES4 


“SECTIONAL PARTITIONS 3% 
Telephone `КБагпу. 1518 
в 


9 
Е Жы Fi 


sea! 


BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 


Recent Contracts Completed 
Y. W. C. A. Building 
San Francisco 

Library Building 
Berkeley 

Post Office Building 
Oakland 

City Hospital 
Palo Alto 

Home of the Blind 
Berkeley 


К. Е. PARKER CO., INC. 
135 South Park San Francisco 
Phone КЕ arny 6640 


Phone GArfield 1164 


Hunter & Hudson 


Consulting Engineers 


DESIGNERS OF HEATING 
AIR CONDITIONING 
VENTILATING AND WIRING 
SYSTEMS, MECHANICAL 
AND ELECTRICAL EQUIP- 
MENT OF BUILDINGS 
41 SUTTER STREET 


ROOM 710 


San Francisco California 


5. RASORI 


General Contractor for 
St. Anne's Church, 


San Francisco 


v 


74 New Montgomery Street 


San Francisco 


Phone KEarny 3537 


89 


McNEAR BRICK 


FOR 


Beauty and 
Permanence 
Gres 


McNear Brick Company 


Мат Office and Factories 
McNEAR POINT 
San Rafael, Calif. 


San Francisco Office and Yard 


417 BERRY STREET 


Architectural 
Metals 


Mouldings ~- Grilles 


Tubing - Ornaments 
Bk re 
Steel --- Bronze 


Aluminum 


BRAUN-STEEPLE CO.,LTD. 
636 Potrero Avenue 
San Francisco 


1203 E. 8th Street 
Los Angeles 


APEX 
Blo- Air Fan Heaters 


Portable and Wall Types 
1320 watts to 4000 watts 


Thermostat Control if Desired 


Better. 


Tests 
show 50% 
greater 
temperature 
rise in 
living 


zone. 


Blo-Air Heaters use a fan to circu- 
late the air instcad of depending upon 
ihe alow process of gravity circulation. 
instant heat and a greater amount in 
the lower living zone of the room, with 
the same consumption. Fan can_ be 
nsed without the heat for cooling. 
Switches easily accessible ai top. Can 
be installed under windows. 

There is a complete line of Apex Alr 
and Water Heaters. 


APEX Manufacturing Company 


Oakland, California 
Distributors 
SANDOVAL SALES CQ. 
557 Market St., San Franciace 
APEX SALES CO. 

1855 Industrial St., Los Angeles 


90 


slum clearance will undoubtedly 
be made in New York. In addi- 
tion to projects already tentatively 
approved by the New York State 
Housing Board entailing the ех- 
penditure of $59,000,000 and call- 
ing for a loan of approximately 
$40,000,000 from the Reconstruc- 
tion Finance Corporation, for 
which application has already been 
granted. Other New York proj- 
ects of about equal amount are 
taking shape, and probably will be 
presented to the Corporation with 
applications for loans. 


This situation, the engineers as- 
sert, indicates the large possibili- 
ties for industrial recovery inher- 
ent in the housing aspects of the 
Emergency Act. Congress, it is 
pointed out, imposed no limit on 
the funds which might be allotted 
{0 these and other self-liquidating 
projects. 


The legislatures of Illinois and 
Ohio are now in session, and, it 
is believed, will pass legislation 
creating regulatory bodies to meet 
the requirements of the Emerg- 
ency Act. The movement for leg- 
islative action in Illinois is directed 
by Alfred К. Stern, director of 
special activities of the Julius Ros- 
enwald Fund. 


In Cleveland, architects have 
prepared plans for projects based 
on a survey by the Committee on 
City Plan of the Cleveland Cham- 
ber of Commerce, headed by 
Abram Garfield, president of the 
Cleveland Chapter of the Amer- 
ican Institute of Architects. In 
Cincinnati a housing project is 
being developed by the Cincinnati 
Better Homes Corporation, which, 
it is said, has been highly success- 
ful in providing housing for neg- 
гоез. Groups in Cincinnati, Co- 
lumbus, and Toledo have approv- 
ed the proposed legislation т 
Ohio, which is sponsored by the 
Joint Council and Citizens' Com- 
mittee of Cleveland, and which, it 
is understood, is sanctioned by 
Governor White. Ernest J. Bohn 
is president of the Committee. 


In Boston, Mayor Сиеу has 
appointed an Advisory Commit- 


MULLEN MFG. 
COMPANY 


BANK, STORE AND OFFICE 

FIXTURES—CABINET WORK 

OF GUARANTEED QUALITY 
CHURCH SEATING 


Office and Factory: 

64 RAUSCH ST., Bet. 7th and 8th Sis. 
San Francisco 

Telephone HE mlock 2858 


G. P. W. Jensen & Son 


Building Construction 


320 Market Street, San Francisco 
Phone 2444 


GENERAL 
ROOFING CO. 


HARRY HENNINGS 


Office and Warehouse: 
BEACH AND HALLECK STS. 
OAKLAND, CALIF. 


Member Builders Exchange 
Telephone OLympic 5208 


BATES-CARPENTER 
COMPANY 


Distribntors of 


Building Specialties 


Atsco Roller Screens 
Atsco Tubular Metal Screena 
Fereous and Non Fereous Metal 


Medicine Cas-a—Wood and Steel 
ironing Boards—W ood and Steel 


Shower Doora—Bronze and Aluminum 


Ariston Steel Windows 


Estimates Furnished without Obligation 
551 MARKET STREET 
San Francisco, Calif. SUtter 5328 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


SUNSET 
LUMBER COMPANY 


Registered Architectural 
Woodwork 


= 


Pine and Redwood 
Lumber 


= 


400 High Street, Oakland 
Phone ANdover 1000 


7 АС) 
What architects and all who build have 
learned to expect from Quandt craftsmen: 


"Co-operation for Quality” 
Materials applied efficiently and expeditiously 


by brush or spray application to achieve the 
best result at the minimum cost to (Бе owner. | 


ПА. Quandt & Sons 


Painters and Decorators 
( бімсе 1885 
№ 374 GUERRERO STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 

Telephone MArket 1711 

ewe 

Quandt-quality is available for the small job 
as well as the large. Pioneers and Special- 
ists in the application of Lacquer in the 
architectural field, Complete decorative 
color schemes designed and furnished. 
3 Advice for technical painting requirements 
MI furnished. Our operations are state-wide. 


WEDGE NOTCH COLUMN CLAMPS 


FOR 
Rapidity, Economy 
and Efficiency 
USE 
STEELFORMS 
FOR 
Concrete Construction 


STEELFORM 
CONTRACTING CO. 


SAN FRANCISCO LOS ANGELES 
PORTLAND SEATTLE 


LITTLE WONDER SCAFFOLDS 
DOVETAIL ANCHOR SLOT 


STEEL, CONSTRUCTION TOWERS 


Pine and Redwood 
Lumber 


Creo-Dipt Stained Shingles 


A. J. Russell, Mgr. 


16 California St. 
San Francisco, 
Calif. 


The Architect and Engineer, November, 1932 


tee to study housing legislation. 
The chairman is William Stanley 
Parker of the Boston Chapter of 
the American Institute of Archi- 
tects. The committee is now work- 
ing for the passage of a statewide 
act setting up a regulatory body 
in the Department of Public Wel- 
fare. 


Misunderstanding exists as to 
the conditions under which the 
Reconstruction Finance Corpora- 
tion can make housing loans. П- 
lustrative of the requirement that 
a local regulatory authority ex- 
ist, is the Corporation's attitude 
toward the application for a loan 
from a Mississippi manufacturer 
for the purpose of erecting homes 
for the husbands of women em- 
ployed in a shirt factory. 


The Corporation, in rejecting 
the application, expressed the view 
that it was the feeling of Congress 
in enacting this legislation that the 
Federal Government could пог af- 
ford to make loans for housing 
purposes if it also had to take over 
the burden of management. The 
Emergency Act, therefore, pro- 
vides for loans only where this 
burden is assumed by a local reg- 
ulatory authority. 


The question of what is a fam- 
ily of low income will necessarily 
have to be determined in accord- 
ance with conditions in the local- 
ity where a housing project is to 
be erected, a Los Angeles com- 
pany which applied for a loan has 
been informed. An approach to 
this problem, however, is con- 
tained in the New York State 
Housing Law, which provides for 
a maximum average rental per 
room per month of $12.50 in New 
York County and $11.00 else- 
where. 


A bill now before the Illinois 
legislature provides that the aver- 
age maximum rental in cities hav- 
ing a population of over 150,000 
for two-room apartments shall be 
$25; for three-room, $32; for four- 
room, $39; for five-room, $46; for 
six-room, $53, and for apartments 
having more than six rooms, $53 
plus $7 for each additional room. 


STEEL 
WINDOWS 


For Every Type of Building 


DETROIT STEEL PRODUCTS 
COMPANY 
Pacific Coast Factory: Oakland 
Branches 
Los Angeles 


San Francisco Seattle 


Good Buildings Deserve 
Good Hardware 


581 Market Street 
SUtter 6063 


Office 


Partitions 


Reinhold sectional wood and 
glass partitions (interchange- 
able) may be adapted to any 
modern office requirement in a 


new or old building. 


Complete Information File 
sent on request 


Pacific Manufacturing 
Company 


High Class Interior Finish 
Quality Millwork 
Monadnock Bldg., 
San Francisco Loo Angeles 
GA rfield 7755 AX ridge 9011 


1315 Seventh Street, Oakland 
GL encourt 7850 


641 Merrill Ave., 


Fenestra 


91 


Structural 


Steel 


Fabrication and Erection 


пл 


Pacific Coast 
Engineering Co. 
Foot of 14th St., Oakland 
Hl gate 1322 


Anderson & Ringrose 


General Contractors 


320 Market Street, San Francisco 
Phone DO uglas 1373 


LEATHER-STEEL 
RUBBER-COCOA 
wood 


Mats and Mattings 
Ezy-Rug Carpet-Tex 


Manufactured and Installed by 


LEATHER 
MAT MFG. CO.. Inc. 


340 Sansome St. San Francisco 


DINWIDDIE 
CONSTRUCTION 
COMPANY 


Builders of the new дутпа- 
sium, University of Cali- 
fornia; Grace Cathedral, 
Russ Building and Hartford 
Insurance Building, San 
Francisco; Life Science 
Building, University of Cali- 
fornia, Berkeley. 


CROCKER BUILDING 
SAN FRANCISCO 


92 


STATEMENT OF THE OWNERSHIP, MAN- 
AGEMENT. CIRCULATION, ETC. RE- 
QUIRED BY THE ACT OF CONGRESS 
OF AUGUST 24, 1912, 


Of the Architect and Engineer, published 
monthly at San Francisco, Calif., for October 
15500357 


State of California } 58 
City and County of San Francisco f 


Before me, a notary public in and for the 
state and county aforesaid, personally ap- 
peared W. J. L. Kierulff, who, having been 
duly sworn according to law, deposea and says 
that he ia the Business Manager of The Archi- 
tect and Engineer, and that the following ia, 
to the best of his knowledge and belief, a true 
statement of the ownership, management (if 
daily paper, the circulation), ete., of the afore- 
said publication for the date shown in the 
above caption. required by the Act of August 
24, 1912, embodied in section 411, Postal Laws 
and Regulations, printed on the reverse of this 
form, to-wit: 


1. That the names and addresses of the pub- 
lisher, editor, managing editor, and business 
managers are: 


Publisher, The Architect and Engineer, Inc., 
1662 Russ Bldg., San Francisco, Calif. 


Editor, Е. W. Jones, 1662 Russ Bldg., San 
Francisco, Calif. 


Managing Editor—None, 


Businesa Manager, W. J. L. Kierulff, 1662 
Russ Bldg., San Francisco, Calif. 


2. That the owner is: (1f owned by a cor- 
poration, its name and address must be stated 
and also immediately thereunder the names 
and addresses of stockholders owning or 
holding one per cent or more of total amount 
of stock. If not owned by a corporation, the 
namee and addresses of the individual owners 
must be given. If owned by a firm, com- 
pany, or other unincorporated concern, its 
name and address, as well as those of each 
individual member, muat be given.) 


The Architect and Engineer, Inc., 1662 Russ 
Building, San Francisco, Calif. 


W. J. L. Kierulff, 1662 Russ Bldg. San 
Franciseo, Calif. 


Е. W. Jones, 1662 Russ Bldg., San Fran- 
cisco, Calif. 


L. B. Penhorwood, 1662 Russ Bldg. San 
Franciaco, Calif. 


3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees, 
and other security holders owning or holding 
one per cent or more of total amount of bonds, 
mortgages, or other securities are: (If there 
are none, so state.) None, 


4, That the two paragraphs next above, giv- 
ing the names of the owners, stockholders, and 
security holders, if any, contain not only the 
list of stockholders and security holders as they 
appear upon the books of the company but 
also, in cases where the stockholder or security 
holder appears upon the books of the company 
as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation, 
the name of the person or corporation, for 
whom such trustee is acting, is given; also 
that the said two paragraphs contain state- 
ments embracing affiant's full knowledge and 
belief аз to the circumstances and conditions 
under which stockholders and security holders 
who do not appear upon the books of the com- 
pany as trustees, hold stock and securities in a 
capacity other than of a bona fide owner ; and 
this affiant has no reason to Lelieve that any 
Other person, association, or corporation haa 
any interest direct or indirect in the said stock, 
bonds, or other securities than as so stated by 

im, 


5. That the average number of copies of each 
issue of this publication sold or distributed, 
through the mails or otherwise, to paid sub- 
scribers during the six months preceding the 
date shown above is. (This information is re- 
quired from daily publications only.) 


W. J. L. KIERULFF, President. 


Sworn to and subscribed before me this 26th 
day of September, 1932. 


(Seal) GRACE SONNTAG. 


{My commission expires Dec. 12, 1933.) 


J Ы a mi a Ma Wi i 


jS WESTERN 
A IRON & 
WORKS 2 


STRUCTURAL STEEL 


WESTERN IRON WORKS 
141-147 BEALE STREET 
132-148 MAIN STREET 


San Francisco Phone DAvenport 2575 


REPUBLIC STEEL 


CORPORATION 


Rue 


Manujocturers of 


ENDURO Stainless Steel; TON- 
CAN Copper Molybdenum Iron 


Sheets and Pipe; and Steel Pipe, 
Sheets and Reinforcing Bar for 
every building purpose. 


Write for information 
Rialto Building, San Francisco, Calif. 
First Natl. Bank Bldg., Los Angeles 
Smith Tower Building, Seattle, Wash. 


ON 


BURNERSc 


For use in Commercial and 
Industrial Buildings, Apart- 


ment Houses and Homes. 


ө 
S. T. Johnson Со. 


Main Office and Factory 
940-950 Arlington St., Oakland 


MacDonald & Kahn 


General 
Contractors 


CNO 


Financial Center Bldg. 
405 Montgomery St. 


Sen Francisco 


The Architect and Engineer, October, 1932 


ТНЕ 
ARCHITECT 


AND 
ENGINEER 


DECEMBER 1932 


WHO 
THINKS ABOUT 
ELEVATORS? 


Miraculous development in recent years in elevator con- 
struction by Otis Elevator Company have brought the elevator 
to the attention of many people. Today, good elevator service 
is one of the foremost considerations in the eyes of the pros- 
pective tenant. He appreciates well-appointed elevator cars and 
entrances, elevators that are free from jolts and jars, and he 
doesn’t like to wait long for the elevator and wants to reach 
his destination quickly. The building owner or manager who 
can give him good elevator service has a distinct advantage 
when it comes to renting floor space. 


It is because of these recent engineering feats by Otis that 
the architect confidently specifies Otis in his plans for a new 
building or a modernization project. He feels sure that an Otis 
installation will not only meet with the approval of the building 
owner, but of the public as well. 


OTIS 


ELEVATOR COMPANY 


339 OFFICES THROUGH- 
OUT THE WORLO 


Johnson Automatic Control 


Ме Brain’ of the 
Air Con 


m^ ea 
с LI w, E 


"на 


Cui ші "ані сш 


ОШО POWER CO., Office Bldg., CANTON, OHIO 


Vernon Redding aud Associates 'The А. C. Eynon Plumbing Co. 
Architects lleating & Ventilating 
Manstield, Ohio Canton, Ohio 
Cooling and Air Conditinning Corp. 
Air Conditioning Engineers 
New Yark City 


THE AIR CONDITIONING UNIT IS THE 
“HEART” OF THE PLANT . . . THE DUCTS ARE THE 
“CIRCULATORY ЗУЗТЕМ??. .. BUT THE AUTO- 
MATIC TEMPERATURE AND HUMIDITY CONTROL 1$ THE 
“BRAIN” WHICH COMMANDS THE WHOLE INSTALLATION 


ү, EN the control apparatus is JOHNSON, dependa- MAN UFACTURERS 
bility and accuracy are assured. Only the Johnson Service Company offers EN GINEERS 
CONTRACTORS 
such a complete line of devices for air conditioning control. Differential AA 
Thermostats for sensing outdoor and indoor conditions . . . Dual (or two- А Single Ongamzation 
temperature) Thermostats . . . Extended tube Wet and Dry-bulb Instru- Open "tug Through 


Direct Factory- 
Branches 


ments . . . Velocity and Static-pressure regulators . . . Humidostats. 


Consult a Johnson Engineer at the nearest branch office. 


Automatic Temperature Regulation since 1885 


JOHNSON SERVICE COMPANY 
Main Office and Factory 


MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN 


HEAT CONTROL 


Branch Offices in All Principal Cities 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 3 


Thumb Tacks and T- Square 


TWO prominent San Francisco 
contractors were invited to address the 
Northern California Chapter at a recent 
meeting. One of them was Wm. S. Din- 
widdie, head of the Dinwiddie Construc- 
tion Company who spoke upon the rela- 
tionship of the contractor and the arch- 
itect. He urged closer cooperation for 
the good of the architectura! profession. 
the building industry and the owner. He 
told of how the contracting business prop- 
erly conducted has prospered and the 
same good fortune is in store for the 
architect if he will follow at least two 
important fundamentals when he secures 
a commission. The first is not to under- 
estimate a job for the sake of securing 
one, and second, insist upon strict in- 
spection of the work. Too many archi- 
tects fall down in their preliminary esti- 
mates. They are not dependable. When 
final bids are taken somebody must suffer 
if the building is be put up for anywhere 
near the preliminary estimate. In New 
York City ten building projects carried 
forward over a period of five years cost 
$28,000,000 for which the preliminary 
estimates were $16,000,000. It is far bet- 
ter to have the preliminary estimate of a 
building excessive than underestimated, 
even in the face of a possibility that the 
owner will decide not to go ahead with 
the project because too much money is 
involved. But it is far better not to build 
at all than to build poorly, Mr. Dinwid- 
die says. The owner who considers price 
gets just what he pays for and no more. 
Regarding the peddling of bids there is 
less of it being done in San Francisco to 
day than ever before and it appears as 
if the general contractors have seen the 
light and are now willing that all con- 
cerned should share with them in making 
a reasonable profit. 

ия поа 

ARCHITECTS and landscape еп- 
gineers on the Pacific Coast have in 
years past had cause to think twice be- 
fore bringing the tree surgeon into their 
client's affairs. Tree surgery is a highly 
specialized profession and for that reason 
unreliable persons have taken advantage 
of the unsuspecting to practice rather 
questionable methods in the treatment of 
their tree problems. 

There are reliable and scientifically 
trained tree surgeons operating in these 
Western States and ordinary care and 
investigation on the part of those inter- 
ested, will put them in contact with men 
who can handle all tree surgery without 
endangering the relationship of the archi- 


4 


tect and landscape engineer and his client. 

Trees are entitled to the same care, 
when Ш, as are human beings and a 
“quack” cannot minister to the ills 5f 
either. 

0 и 88 
HERE'S one on competitions tnat 
should go down to posterity. It is re- 
printed from the monthly Bulletin of the 
Washington State Chapter, А. I. А.: 

"Another published item brought to 
the attention of the Bulletin editor is the 
following giving an account of the assist- 
ance given by a distinguished British 
artist to our fight against unfair competi- 
tions. 

“When Sir Philip Burne-Jones was 
traveling in the United States he received 
a circular letter from a firm engaged in 
the sale of dried fruit inviting him to 
compete for a prize for the best design 
to be used in advertising their wares. 
Only one prize, the circular stated, was 
to be given, and all unsuccessful draw- 
ings were to become the property of the 
firm. After reading the circular, Sir Philip 
sat down and wrote the following letter: 


Manager Dried Fruit Company. 
Dear Sir: 


I am offering a prize of fifty cents for the 
best specimen of dried fruit, and should be 
glad to have you take part in the competi- 
tion. Twelve dozen boxes of each kind of 
fruit should be sent for examination, and all 
fruit that is not adjudged worthy of the prize 
will remain the property of the undersigned. 
It is also reauired that the charges on the 
fruit so forwarded be paid by the sender. 


Yours very truly, 
P. BURNE-JONES. 


я 


HEAVY imports of foreign steel 
last year resulted in depriving 240,000 
American workmen of a week's work, 
according to J. W. Thomsen, of the 
Stupp Bros. Bridge & Iron Company of 
St. Louis, addressing the tenth annual 
convention of the Aunerican Institute of 
Steel Construction in Pittsburg last 
month. 

According to Mr. Thomsen, the im- 
portation of steel from Continental Eur- 
ope to the United States has increased 
rapidly in the past two years and due 
to the very low percentage of opera- 
tions the loss of this tonnage has been 
felt very keenly by our American mills. 

It is well known that foreign steel is 
being delivered to our coastal cities at 
prices which are demoralizing not only 
to the price structure for plain material 
—but also to that for fabricated mate- 
rial. 


ANENT the two recent articles in 
this magazine dealing with the air cool- 
ing problem, the following communica- 
tion asking for some dependable infor- 
mation on the cost of installing an air 
conditioning plant in a building is per- 
tinent: 


"The problems of filtration, humidify- 
ing, dehumidifying, heating, washing, 
cooling and purifying air in order to 
make it fit for human consumption, en- 
gaged the attention of the Illinois So- 
ciety of Architects at a recent meeting. 
The purpose of the assemblage, as edver- 
tised, was to dispel the confusion sur- 
rounding this subject and clear up the 
many questions perplexing architects out 
of work or out after work. 


“But zounds! As the sweet bard of 
Avon would say, confusion is worse con- 
founded. The engineers captured our sin- 
cerest admiration by the deft manner in 
which they toyed with thermostats, 
ductostats and humidistats. The contrac- 
tors intrigued our deepest interest with 
their manipulation of solenoids, para- 
noids and schizoids. But both of them 
left us with nothing but aching voids 
when the subject veered to the matter 
of costs, Floundering around in a sea of 
bewilderment, the architects cried out 
desperately but vainly for a life-line of 
understanding in the form of cost data, 
but nary a datum was there. 


“How much does it cost? Well does 
the architect realize the portent of those 
five fateful words. They compose the 
first question the client asks of his archi- 
tect and their answer is the last thing 
said client ever forgets—especially if the 
final cost is not in agreement therewith. 


“Accurate cost data is absolutely es- 
sential to the architect. Rapid methods 
for making preliminary approximations of 
cost are just as vital. Conditioned air is 
no exception to the general run. The very 
fact that it is rapidly coming into popu- 
larity, furnishes the more potent reason 
for the necessary basic data. If the engi- 
neers and the contractors fail us, there 
is only one source of information left. 
We must turn to the politicians. They 
are experts on air, though much of it 
lacks any conditioning.” 

—Tirrell J]. Ferrenz. 


We are indebted to the Bulletin of the 
Illinois Society of Architects for the 
above. Let's hear from the authorities 
now so we can get this matter of cost 
straightened out. 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


ТНЕ 


ss ARCHITECT 4... 


NUMBER 3 


AND 


ENGINEER 


Cover Picture 


Froutispicce 
11 
25 
31 
FREDERICK W. JONES, Editor x 
EDGAR М. KIERULFF, А55, Editor р. 
52 
Contributing Editors Е 
CLARENCE R. WARD, San Francisco А 
CARLETON MONROE WINSLOW, CN 
Los Angeles 4 
HAROLD W. DOTY, Portland, Ore. E ; 
CHAS. Н. ALDEN, Seattle, Wash. 
Consulting and Advisory Editors 111025. 
]. HARRY BLOHME 
LEWIS P. HOBART 
TIMOTHY L. PFLUEGER 
ELMER GREY 
CLARENCE A. TANTAU 
WM. L. WOOLLETT 
JOHN J. DONOVAN 2 
JOHN BAKEWELL, JR. 3 
EDWIN L. SNYDER s 
THOMAS J. KENT 39 to 51 


ALBERT F. ROLLER 

J. STEWART FAIRWEATHER 
JOHN W. GREGG 

EMERSON KNIGHT 

CHAS. H. CHENEY 

W. ADRIAN 

JULIAN С. MESIC 

Н. J. BRUNNIER 

L. H. NISHKIAN 


(69һ15 Issue 


HOLY SEPULCHRE MAUSOLEUM, HAYWARD, CALIFORNIA 
H. A. Minton, Architect 


MISSION DOLORES CHURCH, SAN FRANCISCO 
H. A. Minton, Architect 


RECENT WORK OF H. A. MINTON, ARCHITECT 
Rev. Richard J. Curtis 


A STEP FORWARD IN STATE PARK PLANNING 


"WE BATTLE THE COUNTLESS MILLIONS" 
Chet Ninekirk 


VICISSITUDES ОР A YOUNG ARCHITECT 
Elmer Grey, Е.А Л.А 


ARCHITECT MAY COLLECT FEES ON ABANDONED PROJECTS 


THE SMALL HOUSE OF THE FUTURE 
L. E. Olsen 


BIWAY PROMISES RELIEF FOR CITY TRANSPORTATION 
NEW LOW COST FOR AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM 
WITH THE ARCHITECTS 

CHAPTER AND CLUB MEETINGS 


PLATES AND ILLUSTRATIONS 


THE WORK OF H. А. MINTON, ARCHITECT 
Building for Bank of America, San Jose 
Maryknoll Junior Seminary, Los Altos 
Chapel, Santa Clara College 
Altar. Maryknoll Junior Seminary 
St. Brigid's Parochial School, San Francisco 
St. Brigid's Church, San Francisco 
Holy Names Central High School. Oakland 
Novitiate for Christian Brothers, De La Salle 
Holy Sepulchre Mausoleum, Oakland 

San Joaquin Mapsolenm, Stockton 
Detail, St. Joseph’s Mausoleum, San Pablo 


DESIGN FOR DOHENY STATE PARK, ORANGE COUNTY, CAL. 


. УМС. BUILDING, SAN DIEGO 
Clarence Е. Decker and Е. И’. Stevenson, Associoted Architects 


OIL PAINTING OF CATALINA ISLAND by Elmer Grey, Architect 
SKETCHES ABROAD AND IN CALIFORNIA by Carl Westdohl Heilborn 


bext OAfonth 


MESSRS. THOS. J. KENT AND ANDREW T. HASS, an architectural firm 
whose work in ecclesiastical and domestic architecture in the San Francisco 
Bay region has received much favorable comment by critics, will contribute 
photographs and drawings of some of their recent buildings. 


The third installment of Elmer Grey's interesting series of articles on his 
architectural experiences while a young man will be found even more 
fascinating than the first two chapters. 

А. A. Brown. C. E.. will describe some of the salient points in the re- 
cently published report by a Committee of the American Society of Civil 
Engineers of Subsidence and the Foundation Problem in San Francisco. Sev- 
eral full page plates of exceptional interest and value to engineers, architects 
and contractors, will accompany Mr. Brown's article. 


Published monthly by THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER, INC. 
1662 Russ Building, San Francisco, California 


W.J. L. KIERULFY, President and Manager 


FRED'K. W. JONES, Viee-President L. В. PENHORWOOD, Secretary 


WILLIAM W, BRADFORD, Advertising Manager 


New York Representative—The Spencer Young Company, 299 Madison Ave., New York City 


Subscriptions—United States and Pan-American, $4.00 a year; single copy, $ .60, Canada and foreign countries, $6.00 a year. 


ТНЕ 
ARCHITECT 
AND ENGINEER 


DECEMBER 1932 
VOLUME 111 
NUMBER THREE 


RECENT WORK OF H. A. MINTON, ARCHITECT 


by 
Rev. RICHARD J. CURTIS 


If we were to attempt a generic classifi- 

op. cation of the architectural accomplishments 

O ask a man who of Mr. Minton in San Francisco and Cali- 

is neither a technician nor yet a master- fornia we should be apt to decide that his 


craftsman to express his impressions of talents have been concentrated chiefly upon 
the works of an architect, is unquestion- the architectural епс of two great 


ably a dangerous 
thing. For the im- 
pressions of a man 
who invariably goes 
pale at the sight of 
an ordinary blue- 
print and who faints 
quite away at the 
simple suggestion 
that he compare the 
Chalukyan style of 
the Gopura of the 
Temple of Siva with 
the Dravidian effects 
in the Great Pagoda 
at Tanjore, arebound 
inevitably to be arch- 
itecturally heretical. 

Nevertheless even 
such a man may have 
his point of view; 
and,—what is worse, 
—under the slight- 
est provocation he 
may insist upon ex- 
pressing it. 


ыы там ak AEE 
нити р) 1 КЕТІП 


BUILDING FOR BANK ОЕ AMERICA, SAN JOSE 


Н. A. Minton, Architect 


motivating ideals of 
human life: Finan- 
cial Confidence as 
expressed in Banks, 
and Religious Faith 
as expressed in Ec- 
clesiastical Edifices. 

In both of these 
endeavors Mr. Min- 
ton has disclosed 
himself a pragmatic 
artist. À pragmatist 
you will remember, 
—if you have heard 
or read Professor 
William James of 
Harvard,—is а man 
who strives ргипаг- 
ily to create or pro- 
duce something of 
practical utility. The 
utility of the thing 
produced, in fact, 
can be the only ulti- 
mate form of its 
goodness and truth. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 11 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


MARYKNOLL JUNIOR SEMINARY, LOS ALTOS, CALIFORNIA 
H. А. Minton, Architect 


CHAPEL, SANTA CLARA COLLEGE, SANTA CLARA, CALIFORNIA 
Н. А. Minton, Architect 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 12 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


And a pragamatist who is also an artist 
contrives that that practically useful thing 
may also appear as a thing of beauty and 
a joy to all who may behold. 


Mr. Minton has attained to this two-fold 
desideratum in the bank constructions 
which he has contrived, particularly his 
branch buildings for the Bank of America 
throughout the State of California. 


But it is his ecclesiastical architecture 
which concerns us chiefly in this article. 
Here also we may discern the same prag- 
matic artistry. His work for the Catholic 
Church, with which perforce we must deal 
particularly, is invariably characterized by 
its artistic variety of design, and at the 
same time by the individual manner in 
which each separate construction has met 
the varying requirements imposed by loca- 
tion and prospective use. 

In keeping with its policy of providing 
suitable structures to meet ever increasing 
needs, the Catholic Church, under the 
leadership of Archbishop Hanna in the 
Archdiocese of San Francisco, has concen- 
trated upon a building program during the 
past few years. Schools, churches, con- 
vents, parish houses, mausoleums, noviti- 
ates and missions have been included in 
this program. And Mr. Minton has suc- 
cessfully completed a number of each group 
in San Francisco and Northern California. 

Schools designed by Mr. Minton include 
the Holy Names Central high school group 
in Piedmont Heights, St. Brigid's and St. 
Cecelia's. both in San Francisco; Mount 
Carmel in Redwood City, St. Rose's in 
Santa Rosa and St. Mary's School for 
Bovs, in Stockton. 

The Maryknoll Junior Seminary at Los 
Altos, California, on which project Mag- 
innis and Walsh of Boston were the con- 
sulting architects, has a unique educational 
purpose. Conducted by the Maryknoll 
Fathers, an American Missionary Society, 
and devoted to the instruction of mission- 
aries who will go to China, Manchukuo 
and Korea, this Los Altos structure artistic- 
ally reflects the architectural motif of the 
countries to which its students are dedi- 
cated. Arcades and towers, plain surfaces 
relieved by ornamental Oriental features. 
and well studied fenestration, make the sil- 


houettes and facades interesting from all 
angles. The interior continues the feeling 
of the Orient both by its architectural style 
and by the furnishings. The most import- 
ant unit—the chapel—fittingly radiates an 
air of devotion and peace without losing 
the mystic atmosphere so typical of the 
Far East. 

Corrective institutions in which the err- 
ing boy or girl, through proper education, 
might be brought to good American citi- 
zenship, have always been fostered by the 
Catholic church in this country. The Home 
of The Good Shepherd, in San Francisco. 
offers its occupants an opportunity to learn 
and develop in surroundings which do not 
remind them constantly of their confine- 
ment. 

At Mont De La Salle, near Napa, Cali- 
fornia, the aspirants for the profession of 
the Christian Brothers are given instruc- 
tion. The buildings in which they live and 
learn during this period of preparation are 
divided into three units. The Novices por- 
tion is separated from the Juniorate by the 
administration building, which houses the 
infirmary, chapel and dining rooms. The 
chapel is worthy of particular mention. It 
very properly dominates the entire group. 
and with its natural wood beams and 
trusses, its exquisite outer corridor and its 
beautiful vestibule doors of hand-carved 
wood, it offers artistically the ultimate note 
of religious inspiration so greatly to be de- 
sired in such a surrounding. Both the Nov- 
ices unit and the Juniorate are complete in 
themselves, with living quarters for their 
occupants. Arcades, at once both practical 
and artistic, are a feature connecting the 
various units and providing an inspirational 
atmosphere for meditation. 


At the Santa Clara University Mr. Min- 
ton is responsible for two of its recent 
buildings—the Chapel and the Dormitory 
—which again express intuitive ability in 
combining use and form. 

It has always appeared to us, as “опе 
less wise" and at the same time as one 
whose ideas must “willy-nilly” be express- 
ed that the most difficult task with which 
an architect might be burdened would be 
the remodeling of churches under the hand- 
icap of our unswerving insistence that the 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER Е | 13 > DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


MAIN ALTAR, MARYKNOLL JUNIOR SEMINARY, 
LOS ALTOS, CALIFORNIA 


H. A. MINTON, ARCHITECT 
MAGINNIS AND WALSH, CONSULTING ARCHITECTS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER Е | 14 > DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


ST. BRIGID'S PAROCHIAL SCHOOL, SAN FRANCISCO 
H. A. MINTON, ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 15 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


different heights, 
—the lower parts 
of which were 
from the original 
building — appro- 
priately completes 
this tradition auto- 
chthonic structure 
so intimately con- 
nected with Cali- 
fornia's early set- 
tlement. The re- 
modeled church, — 
practically touch- 
ing the old abode 
structure erected 
by the Spanish 
Franciscans and 
dating back to the 
historic year 1776, 
—rises from and, 
- — аз it were, — 
— <j 1-1. E : carries aloft to our 


m d —— ЧЕН modern civiliza- 
ST. BRIGID'S CHURCH, SAN FRANCISCO, BEFORE ALTERATIONS tion the ancient 
H. A. Minton, Architect tradition of the old 


original traditional line of the edi- 
fice be preserved. Such was the in- 
triguing problem confronting Mr. 
Minton at St. Brigid's and the Mis- 
sion Dolores churches, San Fran- 
cisco. 

St. Brigid's church, situated on 
Van Ness Avenue, one of the city's 
most important thoroughfares, has 
long been associated with San 
Francisco's history. Primarily to 
increase capacity, the Van Ness 
Avenue end was completely altered. 
By reusing the stone facing and the 
rose window the character of the 
original building has been retained, 
while the fine detail of the new ex- 
terior has greatly enhanced its 
beauty. 

Mission Dolores church, with a 
background familiar to all Califor- 
nians, presented rather a problem. 
Its solution was highly successful. 
A rich entrance of Spanish-Mexi- 


can character, flanked on either side ST. BRIGID'S CHURCH, AFTER ALTERATIONS 
by exquisitely designed towers of H. A. Minton, Architect 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 16 b DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


M 


Ny 


ENTRANCE DETAIL, ST. BRIGIDS CHURCH, SAN FRANCISCO 
H. A. MINTON, ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 17 к DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


o£ 


COURT, HOLY NAMES CENTRAL HIGH SCHOOL, OAKLAND 
H. А. Minton, Architect 


“ 
& TE Е NI "b. Шы” 
с Totem 1 к= S “ 
H EH E. er ІН " ү T CONVENT UNIT 1 М Ше Ы 
мен FA. и З 


„=н uL am Tr 


ELFNENTARY 5c HOOT UNIT 


ROLY NAMES CENTPAL HIGH SCHOOL 
AND 
MARYLPOSE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 


PIEDMONT HEIGHTS ~ CALIFORNIA 
sat дш сш 


i; 
H 
{+ 


M 


НА Метан - Авситтест Main Hoop Рая 


HIGH SCHOOL UNIT 


PLANS, HOLY NAMES CENTRAL HIGH AND MARYLROSE 
ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS, OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 
H. A. Minton, Architect 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER “ 18 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Altar by Fink & Schindler 


INTERIOR OF CHAPEL, HOLY NAMES CENTRAL HIGH SCHOOL, 
OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 


H. A. MINTON, ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 19 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Spanish Catholic Mission Nuestra Senora 
de los Dolores. 

Catholic mausoleums represent also an 
important part of Mr. Minton's contribu- 
tion to ecclesiastical buildings. The San 
Joaquin mausoleum at Stockton, the St. 
Joseph's mausoleum at San Pablo, and the 
Holy Sepulchre mausoleum at Hayward. 


ў 

Қ 
4 
е 


à - 
$ bey are » t eek 


ah 


=” ( тос m ` 
or ett Аер \ 


contribution to the general air of tranquil- 
ity that prevails. 

Just as the church building program does 
not embrace only churches, the building 
program of the Bank of America does not 
include banks as its only construction work. 
Office buildings and stores in large numbers 
have been interspersed with banks built and 


ATP for M 
НА] ж. SN 
РА ГОС" oaa 
" MATOS ш: с 
M. „.ү м ни ЮА x- 


NOVITIATE FOR CHRISTIAN BROTHERS, DE LA SALLE, CALIFORNIA 


H. A. Minton, Architect 


are three fine examples of this type of 
building. Although one in purpose, they 
are entirely different in design. Practic- 
ally windowless and without rigid plan re- 
quirements, mausoleums offer to the archi- 
tect splendid opportunity for original treat- 
ment. Extremely dignified and with a 
proper note of funereal solemnity, each is 
rich with appropriate symbolic ornament, 
—particularly accented at the entrances. 
Inside chapels are featured; and long 
marble corridors and private rooms, all 
with crypts lining the walls, add their silent 


owned by this state-wide institution, or its 
subsidiaries. 
While his buildings for the church have 
suitably been designed along traditional 
lines, Mr. Minton's bank work has fol- 
lowed the architectural trend of the times. 
The buildings in Petaluma, Chico, San 
Mateo, Los Gatos, and Hollister are 
among the more recent structures planned 
for the Bank of America. Although their 
plans naturally bear a similarity, their ex- 
teriors and interiors present a diversity of 
design agreeably surprising in this era of 
“chain store” ideas. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER | 20 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


ENTRANCE DETAIL, НОГУ SEPULCHRE MAUSOLEUM, HAYWARD 
H. A. Minton, Architect 


NL C E: „к 
ң ІНЕ "ер ӘРЕ r 

5 К PEE 
= 


тоса poc CHAPELS окр! ГЕ 


MAIN FLOOR PLAN, HOLY SEPULCHRE MAUSOLEUM, HAYWARD 
H. A. Minton, Architect 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 21 j DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


SAN JOAQUIN MAUSOLEUM, STOCKTON, CALIFORNIA 
H. А. Minton, Architect 


- — — -aw e = 


“wry, ` 


BUILDING FOR BANK OF AMERICA, PETALUMA, CALIFORNIA 
H. A. Minton, Architect 


BUILDING FOR BANK OF AMERICA, SAN MATEO, CALIFORNIA 
H. A. MINTON, ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 23 > DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Qe WT ОКО n e ES 
voe De De es де Ші 252 


ENTRANCE DETAIL, ST. JOSEPH'S MAUSOLEUM, 
SAN PABLO, CALIFORNIA 


H. A. MINTON, ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 24 p DECEMBER. NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


А STEP FORW ARD IN STATE PARK PLANNING 


Јо, anc Coast Chap- 


ter of the American Society of Landscape 
Architects, has shown commendable civic 
pride in presenting to the California State 
Park Commission, the following Plan and 
Report of the Development of Doheny 
Park Commission the following Plan and 
in California of legislative action that will 
provide sufficient funds to enable the State 
to employ recognized professional land- 
scape architects on such projects as the 
Doheny park. This need is further empha- 
sized by Guy L. Fleming. custodian of the 
Torrey Pines Preserve at La Jolla, Cali- 
fornia, who says in a letter to Wilbur 
David Cook of Los Angeles, an officer of 
the Pacific Coast Chapter, American Soci- 
ety of Landscape Architects: 

“The urge for trained men in State Park 
work is obvious. Only by the selection of 
such men may we hope to avoid the pitfalls 
of political exploitation and 'hit or miss' 
development. 


“I think the outstanding example of the 
need of a central experienced council of 
landscape advisors is evidenced by the 
lack of coordinated plans for the preserva- 
tion of the natural landscape and scenic im- 
provements along our highways. Through- 
out the State we witness the unnecessary 
spoilation of the landscape because local 
planning commissions and highway engi- 
neers, who are entrusted with the task of 
planning our major thoroughfares, are not 


trained to recognize the scenic factors that 
make a charming highway landscape. 


"Our roadways are becoming stereo- 
typed speedways; desolate wastes of raw 
fills, huge cutbanks, and scarred levels, un- 
attractive and commonplace because of the 
wanton destruction of the native trees and 
shrubs and other natural scenic features 
that border the roadside. 

“The State Highway Commission, as 
well as the State Park Commission, should 
have as counsellors a landscape advisory 
board employed to pass upon all highway 
development. A landscape advisory board 
serving under the Department of Natural 
Resources could direct the plans for State 
parks, parkways and highways. I believe 
that the American Society of Landscape 
Architects is the proper organization to in- 
stitute legislation creating such a board. 

“Г am a strong advocate of using a per- 
centage of the gasoline tax to finance State 


park and parkway development and the 


scenic improvement of our highways. It is 
only just that a portion of the immense rev- 
enue derived from the gasoline tax, a tax 
paid by those who use the highways and 
parks, should finance the rehabilitation of 
our highway landscapes and assist in the 
development of State Parks and park- 
ways." 

In offerina the Doheny Park Plan to the 
State, Mr. Cook of Cook, Hall & Cornell, 
Los Angeles, says: 

"In behalf of the Pacific Coast Chapter 
of the American Society of Landscape 


45» 


Architects, it is my pleasure to present this 
plan and report for the development of 
Doheny State Park in Orange County, 
California, to the State Park Commission, 
through the Parks and Recreation Commit- 
tee of the State Chamber of Commerce. 

"The plan is a contribution from some 
fifteen professional Landscape Architects 
who are intensely interested in advancing 
the State Park Program. 

“It is recognized that one swallow does 
not make a summer, and that one park 
plan, however well designed, does not in- 
sure a meritorious State Park Program. 


"A long step has been taken towards ac- 
quiring land for our State parks, and suc- 
cess of the program will depend on the suc- 
cessful and skillful planning of each and 
every park in the State Park System." 

Following is a copy of the Doheny Re- 
port and Plan: 

On Nov. 6, 1928 the people of the State 
of California ratified by an overwhelming 
majority what is known as the State Bond 
Act. This act provided for the issuance of 
Six Million Dollars in State Bonds to be 
used for the purchase of park lands. with 
the proviso that in making any purchase, 
one half of the cost of the project be con- 
tributed to the State either in money or 


land. 


The State Park Commission had pre- 
viously employed Frederick Law Olmsted, 
a past president of the American Society of 
Landscape Architects, to take charge and 
undertake a complete survey “іо determine 
what lands are suitable and desirable for 
the ultimate development of a comprehen- 
sive well balanced State Park System, and 
to define the relation of such a system to 
other means of conserving and utilizing the 
scenic and recreational resources of the 
State.” 

In commenting оп Mr. Olmsted's report 
the Commissioners have stated, "We can- 
not praise too highly this magnificent re- 
port which deals with the problem in hand 
in a masterly fashion." 

The Pacific Coast Chapter of the Amer- 
ican Society of Landscape Architects com- 
mends the principles set forth in this splen- 


did contribution to Mr. Olmsted in point- 
ing the way to park development; and the 
Chapter wishes to make a contribution 
from its members in advancing the far 
sighted development of State parks, in 
order that the State of California may 
profit to the full in the expenditure of her 
bonds. 

With this idea in view, Mr. Wilbur D. 
Cook, representing the Pacific Coast Chap- 
ter, has attended the meetings of the Parks 
and Recreation Committee of the Southern 
California Council of the California State 
Chamber of Commerce. 

As a member of this committee, of which 
Mr. George R. Bliss is Chairman, he has 
reported back to the Pacific Coast Chapter 
that the State park development program 
is vitally in need of adequate advice in the 
planning of the individual parks which 
comprise the State Park System and pro- 
gram. He has further reported that while 
many parcels of land for State parks have 
been and are being acquired, there is no 
money available at this time for the em- 
ployment of park designers of recognized 
ability, although the committee fully real- 
izes the need of comprehensive intelligent 
park planning. 

Appreciating this situation, and knowing 
that the success of the State Park Program 
requires that the individual parks be scien- 
tifically planned with every consideration 
given for their greatest usefulness to the 
people, the Pacific Coast Chapter of the 
American Society of Landscape Architects 
offered its services in preparing a design 
for one park site to be selected by the com- 
mittee. 

These services have been gladly accept- 
ed by the Parks and Recreation Commit- 
tee in behalf of the State Park Commission, 
En Doheny State Park, Orange County, 

al. 

The designing of parks is one of the out- 
standing activities of professionally trained 
landscape architects. The principles of 
good park design require adaptation to in- 
dividual park sites, and demand that the 
designer have experience, knowledge and 
artistic ability in planning for definite prac- 
tical and aesthetic ends. The aim of park 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E! 26 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


designing is to create the best uses of the 
land, and to supply the fullest opportunity 
for recreation and enjoyment of the people. 

In the training of every professional 
landscape architect, as recognized by the 
American Society of Landscape Architects, 
the study of parks and park problems has 


ч Ад Ae 

fa mw’ Ton 
Te wx ^ 
22 


A. D 
Mr 
сүзу 


ХА p | NER E: ша, с 
тат T 
“1 : 


.ы0%: 
ae d 


ularly those in California, have not fulfilled 
their best potentialities due, in large meas- 
ure, to the fact that many of those respons- 
ible for the planning have failed to appre- 
ciate the highest principles of park design 
and construction. There are of course 
numerous exceptions to these criticisms, but 


Ў 


аста 


nfacH 


MS 

Ў 

Ж Е 
pe 


DESIGN FOR DOHENY STATE PARK, ORANGE COUNTY CALIFORNIA 
Pacific Coast Chapter, American Society of Landscape Architects 


been of major importance. Proficiency in 
park planning requires a thorough knowl- 
edge of landscape engineering in order 
that the ground forms and contours may 
fulfill their part in carrying out the design; 
a thorough knowledge of horticulture in 
order that the selection of plants and the 
planting of trees, shrubs and flowers, may 
create a happy landscape composition; 
and a clear appreciation of the part that 
architecture and sculpture should play in 
the development of every park. 

It is recognized that the parks of the 
United States, in general, and more partic- 


it must be acknowledged that often parks 
have been designed by those who are pro- 
ficient only in horticulture or engineering. 
and who lack the qualities of appreciation 
and training required to transform a barren 
place into a beautiful park development. 
The theory, and too often the practice, 
of allowing parks to grow without any 
competent park design, or any clearly de- 
fined programs of execution, is costing the 
people millions of dollars. This expense 
could have been readily saved, and larger 
returns to the people would have been ac- 
quired, if intelligent foresight and the 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER «ж Dr > DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


judicious planning of our parks had been 
followed. 

Taking up the State Park Program, it has 
been suggested that a few "standard" plans 
should be prepared and that these plans 
should become the basic design for a num- 
ber of State parks. While such standard 
plans might help to a certain extent, a pro- 
gram of this kind would be an unworthy 
solution to this wonderful conception of a 
State Park System such as Mr. Olmsted 
suggests. The essential aim in every park 
should be to create a distinctive individual- 
{гу predicated upon principles of good park 
design, adapted to varying topographic 
conditions and the special functional re- 
quirements of the several types of parks, 
whether regional in character, local parks, 
seashore parks, playgrounds or public 
squares. Each type of park should fulfill a 
distinctive need in its community and 
should be planned with consideration for 
its particular functions in giving recreation 
to the people. 

The Pacific Coast Chapter of the Amer- 
ican Society of Landscape Architects, in 
carrying out its offer to the State Park 
Commission, through the Parks and Rec- 
reational Committee of the Southern Cali- 
fornia Council, State Chamber of Com- 
merce, takes pleasure in presenting this 
Plan and Report in the hope that it may be 
of real service in advancing the State Park 
Program. The design for Doheny State 
Park has been evolved through a series of 
studies and consultations between members 
of the Chapter, and after a thorough in- 
vestigation of the site and its characterist- 
ics. Much valuable information as to flood 
control conditions, tidal data, and a topo- 
graphic survey has been supplied by Mr. 
Leyden representing Mr. Doheny, who was 
the donor of the land and who is very much 
interested in the judicious development of 
this park. 

The Pacific Coast Chapter wishes to ex- 
press its appreciation of the services of 
Messrs. John D. Wright, Charles Diggs. 
and W. D. Cook who acted as a sub-com- 
mittee of the Parks and Recreation Com- 
mittee, who contacted the various interests 
and outlined a general program as a basis 


for the preparation of the plan, as now pre- 
sented. 

А description of the Plan as it appears 
in the Report follows: 

The principles underlying the design of 
a Beach Park, to accommodate large gath- 
erings of people of all ages, coming often 
from considerable distance for recreation 
at the ocean front, have been carefully con- 
sidered in the designing of Doheny State 
Park. This park, located in Orange County, 
comprises some 42 acres and is readily ac- 
cessible by the California State Highway. 
The site, sloping generally from the High- 
way to the shore line with pronounced ir- 
regularities due to the erosive action of San 
Juan Creek, offers problems in landscape 
engineering and flood control that have 
been solved in a way to create a distinc- 
tive individuality to the park design. 

The plan lays great emphasis on the 
main beach, approximately 2600 feet in 
length with a depth averaging 250 feet. 
This beach is adequate to care for many 
thousands of bathers. In addition the plan 
contemplates the construction of a Tidal 
Swimming Lagoon, 750 feet long and 400 
feet wide, to be replenished by fresh sea 
water with every high tide, this lagoon to 
accominodate those bathers who prefer the 
safety and enjoyment of still water activi- 
ties. 

On entering the Park through the main 
tree lined avenue one notices the strong 
use of a major axis, bringing out the im- 
portance of the straight direct entrance 
from the State Highway into the Entrance 
Plaza. The value of this major approach 
is enhanced by the judicious use of heavy 
mass planting approximately fifty feet deep 
paralleling the line of trees and thus screen- 
ing the side views into the parking area 
and Lagoon Beach. 

The terminus of this main entrance ave- 
nue is the spacious, paved Plaza, ample in 
size and about which are grouped the var- 
ious buildings. Directly ahead one sees the 
Bath House and through the central arch 
is an interesting, distant view of the ocean, 
with the wide, expansive beach intervening. 
The other buildings are suggested as future 
locations to cover park needs. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER я 28 he DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY -TWO 


lt is highly important from a point of 
design that all buildings grouped around 
the Plaza shall be restricted to one story 
in height, in order to accentuate horizontal 
lines in the entire park development and 
also to keep the buildings of secondary im- 
portance. 

Across the beach side of the Bath House 
is shown a glassed-in terrace to provide 
protection for those watching the bathers 
and also a place where meals or light 
lunches might be served. 

The main entrance way is to be used by 
pedestrians only and no vehicular traffic 
allowed into the park other than to the 
parking areas. However, one exception 
has been made in providing a by-pass road 
from the main parking area to the group 
of buildings around the Plaza. This spe- 
cial service entrance can be blocked when 
not needed by the installation of remov- 
able posts. 

Passing from the Entrance Plaza to the 
right of the plan, one is led across an Over- 
look Terrace to a semicircular peristyle. on 
each end of which are stair towers. The 
peristyle provides a place for tables and 
chairs for the use of those watching swim- 
mers in the Tidal Swimming Lagoon, while 
the stair towers lead down to the water 
level of the Lagoon, which is approximately 
six feet below the Overlook T'errace. 

The suggestion of a Tidal Swimming 
Lagoon is mainly to take advantage of the 
existing low area in that particular section 
and also to provide a place for still water 
swimming for those bathers who do not 
care to ride the breakers. This will still 


keep open the San Juan Creek water course 


and will properly take care of excess sur- 
face water from the upper lands by the use 
of a gate and check dam at the north end 
of the Lagoon, and also prevent salt water 
from backing up to polute the fresh water 
wells. An adequately sized flood gate 
would be provided in the end of the circu- 
lar sea-wall of the Swimming Lagoon to 
insure proper circulation of water at every 
high tide. 

The south half of the Lagoon will be 
maintained as the deep end while the north 
half will be constructed for a shallow 


depth, with the small beaches on either side 
of this shallow end providing a safe place 
for small children to wade and to play in 
the sand. 

The Entrance Plaza again serves аз a 
direct approach to one of the main features 
of the entire park, namely, the long, grace- 
ful curving and tree-lined Esplanade built 
at a level three or four feet above the beach 
and this difference in grade taken up in a 
wall, into which are built barbecue ovens 
at equal intervals. These barbecues would 
be useable from both the Esplanade side 
and the beach side and would serve as 
architectural features incorporated in the 
Esplanade wall. 

Down the center of the Esplanade is a 
double avenue of large trees providing 
shade for the many benches and picnic 
tables placed the entire length of this ave- 
nue. As a terminus to the Esplanade is 
shown a large open court with a colonnade 
enclosure. This might serve as an Outlook 
Tower for a beach light and also as a life 
guard station. 

Immediately back of the Esplanade is a 
very large area devoted to spacious open 
lawns and planted occasionally with tree 
groups. This entire lawn area should be 
developed very informally to appeal to 
family picnic parties as well as play areas 
for children. 

Automobile parking is provided for with 
the two parking areas adjacent to the main 
highway and these areas are carefully 
screened from the highway and the inter- 
ior of the park by the use of a heavy border 
of planting sixty feet deep. There is ample 
space for four lines of cars and a total 
parking provision for 700 cars. 

As a suggestion for a possible future 
need an extension of the Esplanade is 
shown as a Fishing Pier which will result 
in protection to the beach. 

The Pacific Coast Chapter of the Amer- 
ican Society of Landscape Architects sub- 
mits the above detailed description with 
the earnest hope that it is evident from 
comprehensive planning and careful studv 
a most distinctive design has been produced 
for Doheny State Park expressing unusual 
interest and individuality. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 29 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


кие E 
. (etis Ix I ee ОВ 
|| вела) Bet інгі кьш] | 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 30 г DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Y.W.C.A. BUILDING, SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIA 


CLARENCE E. DECKER AND F. W. STEVENSON, ASSOCIATED ARCHITECTS 


“WE BATTLE THE COUNTLESS MILLIONS" 


1. is true that the 


dynamic efforts of our civilization to pre- 
vent contamination have been exceedingly 
successful, thereby making it possible for 
our condensed populations to enjoy that 
most valuable of human possessions — 
health. Preventive medicine and effective 
methods of sterilization are of colossal im- 
portance to our enjoyment of life and lon- 
gevity. The food we eat and the water we 
drink must be kept clean and free from con- 
tamination. Naturally, the cleanliness of 
our city water supply is very important and 
on equal terms must be considered the 
proper disposal of sewage if we are to con- 
tinue to enjoy freedom from disease. Right 
here we are brought to the realization that 
the physician and the plumber, the bacteri- 
ologist and the sanitary engineer, are 
officers in the same army; an army which 
knows no armistice, and whose battles must 
never cease, for their foes are the countless 
millions of bacteria which continually pour 
upon the world their numberless batallions 
of disease spreading germs. 

Of all the battles constantly being waged 
against contamination, we are perhaps most 
interested in that one which concerns our 
water supply. When we stop to consider 
that sewer lines and drinking water pipe 
lines are connected to the same plumbing 
fixtures; when we realize that sewage con- 
tamination of drinking water allows rapid 
propagation of dangerous forms of colon 


by 
CHET МІМЕКІКК 


bacteria, only then can we understand the 
importance of proper design and installa- 
tion of sanitary plumbing and water dis- 
tribution systems. It would be almost un- 
believable to think that pollution of any 
kind could possibly under any condition, 
transfer itself from waste to supply pipes. 
It makes us shudder to think of such a 
thing. Nevertheless, let me cite you a glar- 
ing example of just such a condition. It is 
a building having a toilet flush valve in- 
stallation. In this case the closet bowl 
water is siphoned in the opposite direction 
through the flushing valve and back into 
the drinking water supply! Although this is 
not possible when the city water pressure 
is maintained, it is both possible and proba- 
ble when the water service is temporarily 
shut off. For instance, the water main sup- 
plying two or more floors has been tem- 
porarily shut off to facilitate repairs of 
some sort. Then a tenant on one of the 
lower floors, not knowing that the water 
supply has been temporarily discontinued, 
opens a faucet. Immediately the column of 
water in the supply pipe to the upper floors 
lowers, causing a partial vacuum which in 
most existing flush valve installations, be- 
comes effective enough to cause back- 
siphonage of water from a toilet bowl, seri- 
ously contaminating the drinking water 
supply. This sort of thing does happen, 
and the construction of a large number of 
flushometer valves is such as to act in this 
manner. The ports in the toilet bowl flush- 


45» 


ing rim usually provide sufficient air to 
break the vacuum and prevent water leav- 
ing the toilet bowl through the jet aperture. 
Nevertheless, the rush of air which passes 
through the flushing rim ports can be 
plainly heard—anything but a sanitary con- 
dition, to say the least, and certainly a 
source of contamination. 


Ж 
T - 5378 dec 
‚ Tor чот Shawn? 


-Matyot Cavar ] ` 


Ч 5450 1 3 
A. И. 
|, 224722515 Fuga 45 € Y Gates 
ў i _-Aessuwd Gases . Су ТУ 
р | Bion oft Хе) 
1 4 сое > ~ Se 


x 


SECTION A-A 9 


Nore 

Check voles hae bronce ac (727. codes 
with Одогокет type of 6 24 on rni reboe 
facings 

014 to be consfouc^ea са os 2) 4 sores POM 

Locafe Stresture n ary ыту ANNS. Y 
agains’ fea«age 

Еуесезге overates ay ғызас nyar sooo 
лд? сетте Tea. 


APPROVED Br- ГА L Ж 
anh 


CO Olat ESPE 
Сыр оғ BuREAU оғ SANU ARY ENGINEERING 4” 
бәлнеотел ‘Sure бє s eret дк PUBLIC HEATH 


filled with city water, the hook-up is such 
that it prevents any possibility of return. 
Another possible source of city water 
pollution may come from a private supply; 
that is, where the city water supply line is 
connected to a private water system; piping 
and valves so cross connected that the city 
service is always available for use in an 


421 Jg! See! Plate 
R 

эз 
enm 


Р lj ty 
EI mb ІҢ 
-- ЖА” — 4 - "m 
ы ve 
MANHOLE COVER 


Aurson of asrine Crecen Vanves — 

2 Blow ast test arans D and Е fo remove ary sediment 
er soa at тәу have accumulated 

2 Blow off f^e oet cacka undar the gages +o be suce thal the 
gage conmect.one аге сиг, 

3 Closs gale valve M 

4 Open Yes) dram D Pressure on gage A should drop ёо 
тела, ond gage Ө wil! drop part way doe to camprwssion of 4 
rubber facing on clapper a check valve F 

5 With tes! arain D S^ әдеп, open test oran Е Gage B 
и. И droo fo zero ond gage C should remain зѓођотагу 

& Close test droma D and Е, and then coen woe gale va ve М 
Nore - The above procedure ina cates the resuizs obtanabie 
when gate valves, check volves 270 test arans are Igat dr 
any of "ese varea leak the fest draina ana’ gages oravide 
means ror determining. where the wean ex 375 ail these vae. 
sho. J of course се seot hgh? 


EAST BAY MUNICIPAL UTILITY DISTRICT 
Mai 
STANDARD DOUBLE CHECK- 


VALVE INSTALLATION FOR 
SERVICE 


Ааа fust. 


DOUBLE CHECK VALVE INSTALLATION FOR STANDARD SERVICE 
CONNECTION, EAST BAY MUNICIPAL UTILITIES DISTRICT, OAKLAND 


It is gratifying to learn that most manu- 
facturers have taken cognizance of this in- 
sidious hazard to life and health, and have 
devised methods to prevent this menace. 
On the other hand, it is almost unbelievable 
to hear that some cities have not adopted 
the proper precautionary measures. 

The city of Seattle requires that toilet 
flushing valves be supplied with water 
from an open tank installed on the top of 
buildings, thereby furnishing an independ- 
ent water supply. completely isolated from 
the municipal system. Although the tank is 


emergency. The question is—how are we 
going to keep the intermittent user from 
contaminating the city water in the event 
that his supply is dangerous to health? One 
of these cross-connected consumers called 
on his water company to repair the street 
service. While the work was being done, 
water from a windmill tank found its way 
into the city main, and through this cross- 
connection went the dreaded typhoid. A 
most peculiar incident of this case was, 
that the man and his family had been drink- 
ing the germ infested water for some little 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER «4 32 №» DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


time. They had become immune to the dis- 
ease and therefore ignorant of its presence. 
Nature's battle for immunity had been suc- 
cessful. Other citizens of this community 
were not so fortunate. Heavy night treat- 
ment of water mains with chlorine gas 
finally rid the system of the menace. 

Algae growth in open reservoirs of stored 
water is another source of annoyance. Con- 
tamination from bacteria is, of course, of 
much greater concern and it is very impor- 
tant to keep the purity of a city supply 
within the count of 100 per c.c. While all 
bacteria are not dangerous, the Streptococci 
and B. Coli groups are the pollution mon- 
gers; they are the indicators of contagion. 
Many a crystal clear brook or gentle flow- 
ing stream may be unfit for human use, due 
to the presence of these pollution mongers. 
"Flow Gently Sweet Afton" may suggest 
many fanciful pictures to one's mind, and 
the music of this old song is beautiful. АП 
arguments to the contrary, notwithstand- 
ing. and never having seen the Afton River, 
I think that the "flow gently" would bear 
heavy testimony against it as a potable 
water supply. 

It is a matter of record, that the brown. 
bad tasting water of the peat bog (as found 
in Europe and Northeastern United States) 
was recognized by sailors of early explor- 
ing days, to be safer for human use than 
the lucid waters of ponds or slow moving 
rivers. The acid content of this foul smell- 
ing water, without doubt. prevented the 
growth of disease spreading germs. Arti- 
cles lost by peoples of ages past have been 
recovered from the waters of these bogs in 
an unusually good state of preservation, 
due to the pickling qualities of the water. 

There is another type of water supply 
which requires careful supervision. It is the 
swimming pool. Bacteria control in swim- 
ming pool water is often neglected in many 
localities. А swimming pool resembles a 
miniature city water system except that a 
residual chlorine content must be kept in 
the water. This control must be kept within 
two-tenths and five-tenths of one part per 
milion for proper bacteria control. This 
dosage. of course. is necessarily higher than 
is required for a municipal water supply. 

[Turn to Next Page, First Column] 


IMPORTANT RULING OF PUBLIC 
HEALTH DIRECTOR EFFECTIVE 


JANUARY 1, 1933 


STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH 
SACRAMENTO 

March 21, 1932 
East Bay Municipal Utility District, 
Oakland, California. 


Gentlemen: 


In the matter of the application of the East 
Bay Municipal Utility District for permit to 
supply to the district and small adjacent areas, 
through the system formerly owned by the East 
Bay Water Company; also to enlarge San Pablo 
Filter Plant and Upper San Leandro Filter 
Plant, and to serve Mokelumne River water 
provided it is safe, physically attractive, and 
potable, date of application October 18, 1929; 

I wish to inform you that the State Board of 
Public Health, at its regular meeting held on 
March 12, 1932, adopted the following reso- 
lution: 

“WHEREAS, there are numerous cross-con- 
nections existing between the distribution sys- 
tem of the East Bay Municipal Utility District 
and private sources of supply in such manner 
that a flow of water into the distribution system 
of the East Bay Municipal Utility District is 
possible therefrom, and 

WHEREAS, such private sources of supply 
are not under sanitary supervision and are of 
unknown safety and purity, and therefore the 
cross-connections constitute a menace to the 
health of the water consumers of the district, 
and 

WHEREAS, the water supply permit to said 
District, issued by the Board of Public Health 
on September 19, 1931, is temporary by reason 
of the above circumstances, until the elimina- 
tion of the various cross-connections. 

THEREFORE, Be IT ResoLven, that the fol- 
lowing order be issued to the East Bay Muni- 
cipal Utility District, under the provisions of 
the Sanitary Water Systems Act and is a part 
of the aforesaid temporary permit: 

The East Bay Municipal Utility District 
shall: — 

1. Make or cause to be made surveys of 
premises of its consumers and determine whether 
there is a dual or private source of supply there- 
on, or any equipment of any kind, class or de- 
scription which may contain water unfit for 
human consumption, and determine whether 
such source of water or equipment is physically 
connected with the public water supply piping 
of the East Bay Municipal Utility District in 

[Turn to Next Page, Second Column] 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 33 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


Liquid bromide may soon find а new use 
in the field of water sterilization. Recent 
tests, which were made at the University of 
California, to determine the killing power 
of bromine, produced important results. 
Bromine is particularly well adapted for the 
disinfection of swimming pools and the 
smaller types of private and rural water 
supply systems. 

Although we have considered in a very 
small way a few of the possible sources of 
water pollution which affect our life and 
health, how important it is that we consider 
this problem of sanitation real seriously. 
Candidly, it means the life or death of 
civilization. 

In retrospect, we think of great popula- 
tions of ages past—how they struggled for 
existence, only to be hewn down like blades 
of grass before a scythe—victims of unsan- 
itary living. 


such a way that a flow of water into its system 
is possible from such source or equipment, 

2. Where private water systems involve the 
use of tanks the District's supply shall be made 
to discharge over the top of said tanks. 

3. Where private water systems do not in- 
volve the use of tanks, the cross-connection 
shall either be eliminated entirely or protected 
by a double check valve system to be approved 
and suitably installed for convenient inspection 
and test. The installation shall be inspected and 
tested for its water-tightness at intervals of not 
more than six months, and reports of findings 
filed with this Board. The District shall be 
required by the Board to order out any instal- 
lation found from these reports to the Board 
as not reliable in preventing the passage of the 
private supply into the public system. 

4. There shall be no new cross-connections 
installed between private water systems and 
the system of the District. 

5. The above measures shall be carried out 
by January 1, 1933." 

Yours very truly, 
GILES S. PORTER, 
Director of Public Health. 


RECEPTION ROOM, Y.W.C.A. BUILDING, SAN DIEGO 
CLARENCE E. DECKER AND F. W. STEVENSON, ASSOCIATED ARCHITECTS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 34 er DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


VICISSITUDES OF A YOUNG ARCHITECT 


The second of a series of four reminiscent accounts 


of the early architectural experiences of the author 


/ N FTER a short stay in 


Florida I went to Philadelphia to consult 
Dr. S. Weir Mitchell, the eminent nerve 
specialist. He advised me when I got 
strong enough to go on a ranch for a year 
and gave me the name of one near Las 
Vegas, New Mexico, of which he had 
heard. Some physicians toss off advice of 
this kind as though it were such an easy 
thing to do that I will relate here at some 
length what my experience was in trying to 
follow it. Other young architects may then 
know better what they are up against if they 
think of trying it. Theodore Roosevelt was 
one of my heroes and he went on a ranch, 
thought I, which did wonders for him—but 
we are not all Theodore Roosevelts!—and 
ranches are not all alike! 


When I got fairly strong I wrote to a 
ranch owner in Roswell New Mexico, 
whom I knew, asking if he would take me 
in. His reply throws much light on the sub- 
ject. "I should be more than glad to give 
vou something of that sort if it were possi- 
ble," he wrote, "but I feel that you misun- 
derstand the nature of the place and the 
work there. The life is very rough. very 
dirty and food very hard for anyone but a 
tough cow boy to digest. The big pasture 
is about 15 miles from here and we keep 
up there only a small and very rough sort 


by 
ELMER GREY, R A LA 


of place with about half dozen men. They 
are a good type for what we want of them 
but I must confess tremendously dirty, so 
much so that you could not possibly stand 
it to be with them in the same bunk house 
as you would have to be if you went out 
there to work. It is not a flossy place as 
some ranches are more or less when the 
owner's headquarters are right on the cow 
part. There is a great deal of misconcep- 
tion in regard to cow ranches and cow boys 


ELMER GREY, YOUNG DRAUGHTSMAN 
ON A RANCH IN HOLLYWOOD, IN 
SEARCH OF HEALTH 


«45» 


and the ‘Virginians’ are few and far be- 
tween. We don't intend to have the living 
out there any better than the usual cattle 
'outfit' has in this country as it would never 
do at all. Г am terribly sorry therefore that 
I cannot grant your request." 

Balked in this endeavor to find what I 
wanted I decided to go to Las Vegas and 
investigate the ranch of which Dr. Mitchell 
had spoken. When I reached there I found 
that it was practically a boarding house 
situated in the midst of an uninteresting 
expanse of barren country with a goodly 
sum charged for the use of a horse; now- 
adays they are known as dude ranches. 
This did not appeal to me, and my funds 
would not have lasted long at such a place 
anyway. 

Very much discouraged I was at a loss 
what to do next. At any rate I would not 
stay in Las Vegas I decided. But stupidly 
I had left home without a proper means of 
identification and when [ tried to cash а 
check at the bank it was refused. I could 
stay there ten days they said until they 
wrote back and received a reply regarding 
identification! More discouraged than ever 
I sat down on a bench in a public square 
and told my troubles to the man sitting 
next to me. He eyed me critically for a 
moment and then said, “Гат a judge in this 
town and have been living here for thirty 
years. [ will endorse your check!" I was 
certainly grateful for that!—but still I did 
not know where to go. I did not want to 
go back. Browning's lines came to me: 


“Who never turned his back, but 
marched breast forward, 
Never doubted clouds would break; 
Held we fall to rise, are baffled to 
fight better." 


For want of a better thing to do I wan- 
dered down to the station to watch the 
overland train come through. As it stopped 
a newspaper woman whom I knew stepped 
off. After an interchange of greetings she 
exclaimed, “I am on my way to California, 
the land of sunshine and flowers. Better 
come along!” Immediately I thought, why 
not! Rushing back to the hotel, I hurriedly 
settled my bill, grabbed my baggage and 
we were off! 


I've never regretted it! California was a 
paradise compared to barren New Mexico. 
I was muscularly strong now, and in knock- 
ing about to kill time while my nerves qui- 
eted into better shape I was placed in many 
amusing situations. First | went to Cata- 
lina Island where I stayed four months, 
swimming, rowing, playing tennis and fish- 
ing. At that time the principal hotel there 
was a wooden structure called the Metro- 
pole, and the guests from it as well as oth- 
ers from elsewhere who loved dancing fre- 
quented the one large pavilion which still 
stands. I bought а sail-boat and spent 
much of my time fishing, so during the day 
khaki clothes comprised my costume. One 
evening at the pavilion I requested an in- 
troduction to a young lady but was refused 
it because her chaperone was quoted as 
having said that I was a “boatman” and 
she did not care to have her charge meet 
that class of people! The next day [ re- 
ceived a letter notifying me of my appoint- 
ment on the Art Committee of the St. Louis 
Exposition. Of course I was unable to serve 
but they graciously sent me my commis- 
sion which I should like to have shown to 
that chaperone! 


My sail-boat capsized one day off Seal 
Rocks, a rugged, mountainous end of the 
Island which gets the full sweep of the 
wind across the Pacific. I managed to 
crawl on top of the upturned boat, but the 
wind was a smal] gale and I was blown in 
where the waves were curling menacingly 
over submerged rocks and the breakers 
dashing fiercely and high over other rocks 
constituting the shore line. It would have 
been impossible to land. Near by were 
launches but they could not reach me. 
They were, however, able to get near 
enough to call and advise me before it was 
too late to leave my craft and try to reach 
them by swimming. My boat was already 
striking the rocks when I left it and my 
water-soaked garments and shoes were a 
heavy drag. So when finally a rope was 
thrown me and [ was pulled over the side 
I was just about all in! 

Four months is a long time for one whose 
mind is active to stay on an island and play, 
and finally I tired of it. Besides I constant- 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 36 e DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


ly had in mind the advice once given me to 
go on a ranch. One evening 1 noticed an 
advertisement in a Los Angeles newspaper 
which read: 

“Wanted, a ranch hand in Hollywood, 
$25. a month and board. Must know how 
to handle horses." 


The next morning | crossed to the main- 
land to apply for the job. The accompany- 
ing photograph was taken a short time after 
and tells the story of my success in seeking 
outdoor employment. 


(To be Continued ) 


абы. 


г 


^ C" 


OIL PAINTING OF CATALINA ISLAND BY ELMER GREY, ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ^ 37 > DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


CORNER OF LIBRARY, Y.W.C.A. BUILDING, SAN DIEGO 
Clarence E. Decker and F. W. Stevenson, Associated Architects 


SS ee DE -- 
ж 


че” 


ЖЕ ° "Е Ее ЧР ЕЕС EUM 


SWIMMING POOL, Y.W.C.A. BUILDING, SAN DIEGO 
Clarence E. Decker and Е. W. Stevenson, Associated Architects 


ве hes /\broad 


and in 


California 


by 
Carl Westdahl Heilborn 


Hollywood 


PLASTER AND TIMBER, SPAIN—PEN 
AND INK STUDY 
By Carl W. Heilborn 


4 5 р 


SSS N ^w a= SS дут 


Ss 


NARROW STREET IN CONSTANTINOPLE— A STUDY IN 


CONTE CRAYON 


By CARL W. HEILBORN 
THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ғ 41 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


йү. 


e= P We 
ВЕ E : = = T À Wen | Ce 


= ча чс E - 


1 NULL 1 


хы = ы 


4 M 
S 17 
UY | e 
$ 
А 


EN 


if 


i li 


dii; ——. 


МТҚ 1!) 


ШІ 
Nd 


\\ 
Е 


TW 1 ро 


| 


А STREET SCENE DONE RATHER FREELY WITH VERY 


LITTLE PENCIL LAYOUT BEFOREHAND 


By CARL W. HEILBORN 
THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 43 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


мчоялиян "AA "IVO Ая 


sood ЧО LNO NAAVSG 'NOAVHO-OHLIT HLIM 
AGILLS V—STIIH GOOAAATIOH AHL AJAO ӘМІМОО HZVH 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 45 %- DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E] 47 p DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


THE PILE OF WOOD—PEN AND INK AND WASH, DRAWN 


ALMOST ENTIRELY OUT OF DOORS 


By CARL W. HEILBORN 


NSIOSTISH ‘А THVO Аа 


счооа dO LNO NAAV?IG 
‘AGNLS МОЛУЯЭ ALNOD Y-GOOMATIOH AO STIH 


27% му ` 
weil 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER < 49 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


BREEZY AFTERNOON ON A CALIFORNIA RANCH—PEN AND INK STUDY, 
DRAWN OUT OF DOORS 


By Carl W. Heilborn 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER 4 51 > DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


ARCHITECTS MAY COLLECT FEES ON 
ABANDONED PROJECTS 


/ N DECISION of interest 


to architects was recently handed down by 
the District Court of Appeals, Second Dis- 
trict, Division 2, California, in the case of 
Robert B. Stacy-Judd vs. Charles Stone, 
В. W. Purpus, et al., (civ 7124) on appeal 
by the defendants from a judgment for 
$28,180.49 for archictectural services 
awarded the plaintiff in the Superior Court 
of Los Angeles county. Judgment of the 
lower court was affirmed. No appeal was 
taken to the Supreme Court and the Appel- 
late Court decision is final. 

The case grew out of a subdivision pro- 
motion in the hills back of Beverly Hills by 
the Beverly Ridge Company. R. W. Pur- 
pus, who died since the case was appealed, 
was the promoter. Extensive improvements 
were made on the tract and Mr. Stacy-Judd 
was employed to prepare plans for a num- 
ber of large houses which the company рго- 
posed to build. Plans were made for about 
$1,000,000 worth of improvements which 
were abandoned for lack of funds. The ar- 
chitect was to be paid 7 per cent on the 
estimated cost of the work, 2 per cent of 
which was for supervision. He was paid 
$5,800 and brought suit to recover a bal- 
ance of $28,180.49, based on a fee of 5 per 
cent for plans prepared. 

The text of the Appellate Court's de- 
cision, written by Justice Ira F. Thompson, 
follows: 

The plaintiff recovered a judgment 
against the defendants for architectural ser- 


vices rendered to them. R. W. Purpus, one 
of the defendants, prosecutes this appeal 
therefrom. 

(1) The plaintiff pleaded a written con- 
tract consisting of a letter written by him to 
the defendants and an acceptance thereof 
by them. He also in a second count alleged 
an action in assumpsit. The camplaint set 
forth that respondent entered "upon the 
discharge of his duties and performed all 
the work, labor and services required of 
him" by the agreement. In neither cause of 
action, however, did he seek to recover the 
full stipulated price of 7 per cent upon the 
total cost of the buildings, but sought only 
the sum of 5 per cent because after entering 
upon the erection of the contemplated 
structures the work was abandoned. The 
court permitted respondent to testify over 
the objection of appellant that he told the 
manager of the copartnership "that the fees 
would be 7 per cent and that would include 
2 per cent for supervision and that if the 
buildings were not actually constructed I 
should have 5 per cent of the estimated cost 
of constructing the buildings." He was also 
allowed to state that 5 per cent of the esti- 
mated value of the buildings was the rea- 
sonable value of his services, amounting in 
all to $34,180.49, and that it cost him to 
prepare the plans and specifications the 
sum of $28,000. Respondent had been paid 
$5,800 and judgment was in the sum of 
$28,180.49, together with interest and 
costs. 

It is now claimed by appellant that the 
court erred in receiving the testimony al- 


4 > > 


ready mentioned because he says such evi- 
dence tended to vary the terms of the writ- 
ten contract, was without the issues framed 
by the pleadings, and further that where 
the plaintiff pleads and proves an express 
agreement he cannot recover upon an im- 
plied contract. 

Naturally enough, nothing is said in the 
letter of respondent constituting his offer 
nor in the acceptance thereof, concerning 
the abandonment of the plans and specifica- 
tions. It is reasonable to assume that such 
a possibility was not in fact seriously, if 
at all, considered by the parties. It is true 
that the concluding paragragh of the let- 
ter says: “For each and every set of 
plans and specifications I prepare I am to 
receive a fee of two hundred dollars, at the 
time [ am given instructions to proceed with 
the working drawings, said fee to form part 
of my total fees in the event of the buildings 
being erected.” But this quoted language 
relates to the method of payment—not to 
the amount thereof. It provides for a down 
payment, or perhaps, as it might be termed 
in our profession, a retaining fee. Nor is 
anything further said in the offer or in the 
acceptance concerning the method of pay- 
ment. It is to be observed that immediately 
preceding the language quoted the respon- 
dent said in his letter: 

"In reference to the preparation of ten 
complete sets of plans and specifications 
for buildings costing in the neighborhood 
of then (sic) thousand dollars, I herewith 
submit my cost percentage on three resi- 
dence buildings, showing you the basis 
upon which Í now make my proposition of 
compensation. 

"Schelling residence cost 83 per cent of 
total fee to produce. 


“Worrell residence cost 55 per cent of 
total fee to produce. 


"Bishop residence cost 76 per cent of 
total fee to produce. The last on the list is 
hillside property and shows a greater cost 
to me for preparing plans for hillside prop- 
erty." 

From these figures in respondent's letter 
it appears that it cost him as an average 
7] per cent of his fee to produce the plans 
and specifications. He, very apparently, 


thought that the defendants, who were the 
subdividers, should bear a part of this ex- 
pense before the time arrived for payment 
in the due course of things and therefore 
provided for a retaining fee of $200. From 
the average percentage of cost calculated 
upon the figures submitted by respondent, 
plans and specifications for a $10,000 
building would have entailed an expense to 
him (exclusive of supervision) of a trifle 
more than $355. We cannot assume that he 
was foolish enough to adopt the inherent 
improbable plan of spending that sum of 
money in return for $200. The most that 
can be said with respect to the concluding 
phrase, "said fee to form part of my total 
fees in the event of the buildings being 
erected," and the argument of appellant 
that only the sum of $200 was to be paid 
unless the buildings were completed, is that 
the language introduces an element of am- 
biguity and uncertainty which parol evi- 
dence was competent to explain. All of the 
evidence introduced bore upon the uncer- 
tainty in this particular or upon another 
theory about to be stated. 


А reading of the first cause of action 
reveals that it is not an action to recover 
the contract price. The complaint alleges 
that all of the services to be performed 
thereunder were rendered by respondent 
and that they were of the reasonable 
value of the amount sought to be recov- 
ered plus that which was paid. It is dis- 
closed by the evidence that the organization 
composed of defendants collapsed after the 
respondent had done twenty-eight or thirty 
sets of plans and specifications. Through 
the default of defendants and not from the 
failure of the respondent the buildings were 
not constructed. The complaint in the first 
count seeks therefore to recover not the 
contract price but damages for its breach, 
i. e., the reasonable value of the services 
rendered pursuant to its terms. It is con- 
ceivable that respondent might have 
brought his action to recover the entire con- 
tract price of 7 per cent upon the cost of 
the buildings under the authority of Harris 
v. Central Union High School District, 45 
Cal. App. 669, 188, P. 617, and Havens v. 
Donahue, 111 Cal. 297, 43, P. 962; but he 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 53 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


chose rather to sue only for a part thereof. 

(2) Advancing now to the argument of 
appellant that respondent having proved an 
express agreement could not recover upon 
an implied contract, what has been said 
virtually disposes of this contention. How- 
ever, for the purpose of completely con- 
cluding the point, we here make reference to 
Havens v. Donahue, supra, where a some- 
what similar contention was advanced. It 
is there said: "Defendant's first claim is 
that under such contract, plaintiff was only 
entitled to recover his commissions upon 
the cost of construction as far as the build- 
ing had proceeded at the time his employ- 
ment was terminated. This contention can- 


not be sustained. Plaintiff had nothing to 
do with the construction of the building. 
His contract was simply to furnish the 
plans, drawings, and specifications, and 
this he did. The actual construction and 
cost of construction are only material to him 
as fixing the amount of defendant's liability 
for the services rendered. Again, the com- 
plaint also charged upon a quantum meruit, 
and the court found the value of plaintiff's 
services at the amount fixed by the judg- 
ment. This would seem to dispose of any 
question upon such contention." 

Judgment affirmed. 

We concur; WORKS, P. J.,; FRICKE, 


Justice pro tem. 


RECEPTION HALL AND STAIRWAY, RESIDENCE OF W. A. JOHNSON, 
SAN MARINO, CALIFORNIA 


Henry C. Newton and Robert D. Murray, Architects 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER A 54 2 DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


THE SMALL HOUSE OF THE FUTURE 


| HE small house of 


the future shall be made entirely of face 
brick inside and out. partitions, floors, stairs 
and cases. Colors and textures shall suit 
various room requirements, and enameled 
brick shall be used in the baths, laundry, 
and kitchen. I know that is what manu- 
facturers and dealers want, and not in the 
future either, but right now. 

Every manufacturer, engineer, architect, 
sculptor, and poet, is inventing new meth- 
ods and materials for residence construc- 
tion. There is nothing else for them to do; 
it is good mental exercise, and prevents in- 
sanity and high window jumping. 

The trouble with each manufacturer is 
that he tries to use his material for the en- 
tire structure and often in the wrong place. 
Of course, if more of one material, or trade 
could be used in a building, some of our 
difficulties would be solved, and construc- 
tion would be speeded up, as most of the 
time lost in residence construction is get- 
ting the trades on the job at the right time. 
We all know, however, that certain require- 
ments demand their logical material, and 
even if you could fool the dear public, you 
cannot fool the elements for long. Brick 
has proven itself to be the ideal facing 
material for exterior surfaces. Ages of 
usage have proven it, and we are convinced 
that masonry for the exterior walls of a 
residence is the economical and proper 
material. 

Savings in the cost of the small home of 
the future will not come from a change in 


Mr. Olsen is a member of the firm of Olsen & Urbain, Architects, Chicago, 
His remarks were made at a joint meeting of the American Face Brick 
Association and Dealers’ Association, November 2, 1932. 


by 
LE. OLSEN, Architect 


the exterior wall materials used, but will 
come chiefly from the elimination of non- 
essentials in design, from shop fabrication 
of the interior and from lessened financing 
cost for the whole structure. 

As I have before mentioned, there are 
a great number of new methods of con- 
struction, most of which have no merit; at 
least, the many we have investigated have 
little to commend them. But out of all of 
the experimenting and research, something 
good may develop. so it is necessary for all 
manufacturers to perfect their product and 
extol its method of use. 

In Chicago there are experiments being 
made on reinforced brick masonry which 
make me believe we will have a cheaper 
and better method of construction and it 
will be all masonry. Its possibilities are un- 
limited and should give you gentlemen 
much food for thought as I personally think 
it is the greatest development in the art of 
building construction since the introduction 
of reinforced concrete. I can see the pos- 
sibility of a precast brick slab delivered 
to the job with a finished surface having 
beauty and wearing qualities. 

The Century of Progress Exposition in 
Chicago in 1933 will have on display a 
number of the new systems of home build- 
ing. done in the modern style. 

These, together with the design of the 
Exposition, may influence new residence 
construction. [п what direction, no one 
knows, but my guess is that houses will 
continue to be built much the same as at 
present, excepting that the public is asking 
for lower costs, firesafe construction, perm- 
anent materials, less cracks and shrinkage, 
insulation, air conditioning, automatic heat, 


4:55 > 


with lower interest rates, financing charges. 
and reduced taxes. 

Can we obtain lower cost through shop 
fabricated steel homes? First—the public 
does not want them, but it may accept them 
under pressure; second—their cost cannot 
compete with wood faced homes, to which 
class they belong in the economic scale; 
third—the cost of a brick residence having 
the same room dimensions as a steel house 
is the same as the hoped-for mass produc- 
tion cost of the steel house, of course using 
the same arrangement as the steel design, 
with no basement or attic, which are the 
places where the steel design effects the 
greatest saving. The steel house design 
advocates the elimination of unessentials, 
and with this idea, we agree. 

When a designer or fabricator of a steel 
house or any other of the new types of 
construction starts to work out his problem, 
the first man he interviews is the insula- 
tion engineer. I have discussed the new 
methods of construction with many of the 
insulation experts and find that only one of 
the new types of construction has any merit 
and that type should be faced with brick 
veneer. My firm believes in solid masonry 
exterior walls. We contend it is the best, 
when all things are considered. 


The three important arguments against 
the panel type of exterior are the joint at 
panel points, restricted design, and last but 
not least, labor unions. The labor unions 
are entirely forgotten in the shop-fabricated 
house and we all know they are not to be 
forgotten. 

'The cheapest of the small houses of the 
future, especially in the smaller towns and 
villages, will be wood. This form of con- 
struction is still the cheapest and permits 
individual design. The next step higher 
and all those above them will be masonry 
exterior walls, solid, or veneer on wood or 
steel frame. 

In general, the future methods of con- 
struction will be much the same as present, 
but we think interior arrangement and ma- 
terials making up the interior will be im- 
proved upon, cheapened, and simplified. 
Here shop fabrication can come into use. 

We believe interior partitions will be im- 
proved upon and cheapened. 


There will be more use of the combined 
door jamb and trim in metal, which will not 
be affected by moisture and will not open 
up at the corners and will speed up con- 
struction, at less cost. Lathing and plas- 
tering must go out of the small house. 
Those trades cause the greatest delay and 
trouble due to moisture in the construction 
of a building and in the north, in winter, 
temporary heat is required, with additional 
cost and bother. 

When the masonry is finished and the 
building is under roof, the carpenter, with 
the use of some form of wall board, can 
continue right on erecting partitions, finish 
the walls with wall board and lay flooring 
before finished partitions are erected or 
after, and while erecting partitions, com- 
bined metal trim and jamb lining can be set 
up, and the walls are finished. Then unit 
cases, wardrobes, etc., may be set in with- 
out waiting for other trades. 

'The pipe trades could be ready with their 
roughing in by the time the roof is on and 
would not interfere with the finishing. With 
air conditioning or forced warm air, no 
radiator setting would be required after 
floors are finished. The public is demand- 
ing air conditioning: by this, we mean 
forced warm air, washed or filtered and 
humidified. Mechanical cooling is not nec- 
essary. 

А national survey has been made inves- 
tigating what women demand in homes, and 
the following are some of the findings: 
Just sufficient basement space to accommo- 
date heating and laundering is required. 
These could be on the first floor near the 
If no basement these could be on the first 
floor, near the kitchen. They did not care 
for attic space but the roof must be insu- 
lated. Almost all the women wanted auto- 
matic heat; that is, oil burners, stokers, or 
gas. The women of the lower income fami- 
lies wanted separate dining rooms, while 
those who could afford homes costing 
$8,000 to $14,000 did not object to dining 
in one end of the living room or in an 
alcove. 

My firm has just finished taking esti- 
mates on a house without basement, having 


concrete foundation only to a point 4-0” 
below finished grade. The black dirt in- 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 56 > DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


side of building was excavated and ге- 
moved and the ground then brought to a 
proper level with sand fill. Eight-inch 
masonry walls were used for the first floor, 
with mansard roof for the second floor, 
with very little waste space above the sec- 
ond floor ceiling. The building contained 
22,500 cu. ft., and cost $8,000, or 35c per 
cu. ft. The brick masonry, including fire- 
place, cost $1,000, or one-eighth of the 
total cost. The supporting construction of 
the second floor is exposed 4"x10" beams 
in living and dining rooms. All finished 
walls are plaster wall board with armored 
joints. All exterior walls and second floor 
ceilings are insulated. 

We have been experimenting, like others, 
in trying to cheapen the exterior walls, but 
we found it uneconomical to disturb this 
one-eighth part of the cost of the house. 
This proportion of masonry to total cost 
varies with different types of construction. 
Our clients are asking for fireproof or fire- 
resisting construction over the basement, 
and non-shrinkable construction for the 
second floor. 

The difference in cost between wood 
joists with plaster ceiling and finished oak 
floor, and steel bar joists with concrete slab 
and finished oak floor, is 14c a square foot, 
or for a building the size mentioned above, 
the added cost for fire-safe construction 
would be $112.00. If steel nailer joists are 
used on second floor in place of wood joists, 
the added cost per square foot would be 
7c per square foot, or $56.00 for the build- 
ing mentioned above. If gypsum lumber is 
used in place of concrete, it costs 4c a 
square foot more than concrete. In the 
Chicago market there is a reinforced con- 
crete precast slab and joists, obtainable up 
to 20' spans which can be had for about 4c 
per square foot more than steel joist and 
concrete. The battle deck floor with junior 
I beams costs 25c per square foot more than 
ordinary construction or $200.00 more for 
the building mentioned above. 

Now one can readily see that wood joist 
construction is going to stay for the cheaper 
type home and steel bar joists for the better 
grade. 

We have found the elimination of the 
basement saves 5 to 7 per cent, taking into 


account the added cost for laundry and 
heater space on the first floor. In larger 
homes our clients are asking for social 
rooms in the basement, and we have found 
that the only facing material that can stand 
basement conditions is face brick. We have 
tried other materials only to regret it. 

It would be fine if we could eliminate 
some of the lost motion in small house con- 
struction. This we find is due to the num- 
ber of trades required, 18 in all. This is 
where the shop fabricated house will give 
the standard house some stiff competition. 
However, it is not the masonry wall that 
causes the delay. The masonry walls on the 
above-mentioned building could be erected 
in three days with six bricklayers, and I 
would like to know of another trade that 
does more per dollar received than the 
bricklayer. It surely is one building trade 
that is nearest straight line mass produc- 
tion, with your mechanics working in a line, 
and always in sight of the boss. We be- 
lieve the other portions of the building can 
be erected faster, as before mentioned by 
doing away with plastering and by simpli- 
fying the present methods and organiza- 
tion. 

Regarding the style of our future homes, 
it is an indisputable fact that changes in 
architectural style in dwellings are less eas- 
ily accomplished than in other buildings. 
because the home is regarded, and rightly 
во, a permanent and personal investment. 
The materials used in its construction must 
permit individual taste as to shape, texture 
and color. 

А national survey recently made proves 
that less than one-half of the homes in 
America measure up to a minimum stand- 
ard of health and decency, so there is busi- 
ness ahead for all of us. 

The high cost of owning one's home is 
not in the original cost but in the financing 
and carrying charges. taxation and special 
assessments. By reducing the financing 
charges one-half per cent for the five-year 
period and interest charges one per cent per 
year, the amount saved, for example, on a 
$5,000 five-year first mortgage on a $10,000 
house, would be the equivalent of interest 
charges on more than $900, or more than 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 57 Га DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


ten per cent of the original building cost, 
without lot. 

For comparison, I will take another own- 
er's tax on his home and compare it with 
mine on the same kind of house but in dif- 
ferent counties near Chicago. His tax is 
twice mine and if set up as interest on capi- 
tal, my home costs $3,300.00 less, or а sav- 
ing of 16 per cent in the original cost. Now 
in the case of the other owner, if his house 
had been financed with a smaller finance 
charge and with a mortgage carrying 5 
per cent interest and had been built in my 
county, the saving would be equal to 26 
per cent of the original cost of that build- 


ing. We can readily see the stumbling 
block for rapid return of small house con- 
struction under the present conditions, and 
no doubt these conditions exist in all indus- 
trial centers. 

The magazines, newspapers, etc., are all 
full of new construction ideas, most of 
which have no merit, but they serve the 
purpose of keeping up the public desire for 
their home or improvements to their ргез- 
ent home; and after the depression is over, 
the public will be convinced that a home 
built according to their income with a rea- 
sonable first mortgage is the safest and 
most logical investment and that new home 
will have face brick exterior walls. 


THIS HOUSE HAS JUST BEEN COMPLETED AT THE WORLD'S FAIR, CHICAGO. 
It is designed to reflect modern tendencies in Domestic Architecture. Materials used are the lat- 
est rroduct of science and craftsmanship. For elevation and detailed description turn to Page 74. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER «4 58 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


vey V 


ENGINEERING 


CONSTR 


UCTION 


BIWAY PROMISES RELIEF FOR CITY 


TRANSPORTATION 


oq FTER years of 


study a practical system of continuous 
high speed transportation for great masses 
of people has been evolved by Norman W. 
Storer, consulting transportation engineer 
of the Westinghouse Electric and Manu- 
facturing Company. The proposed Biway 
system would replace individual trains 
making bursts of speed between stations 
with two continuous trains or belts of cars 
running on parallel tracks with a station- 
ary landing platform along the entire 
route. It would eliminate jams at station 
stops, simplify operation, reduce noise and 
handle more people safely in less time than 
any transit system yet known. Compared 
to New York's new Eighth Avenue sub- 
way, the Biway could handle 28% тоге 
people per hour—205,000 passengers in- 
stead of 160,000. 

Fundamentally the Biway is a develop- 
ment of the moving sidewalk idea in which 
two parallel traveling platforms or trains 
maintain continuous transportation service 
along a route lined by an arcade of shops 
and store entrances. It is a practical, work- 


able method of preventing congestion by 
keeping crowds from forming. It appears to 
promise speed, comfort, safety, conven- 
ience and dependable operation. 


Storer estimates the construction cost of 
the Biway at not more than two-thirds that 
of a subway. Operating and maintenance 
costs will be about 70 per cent that of a 
subway, in his opinion. He says the Biway 
will take less than 600 kilowatts of electri- 
cal energy per mile of one-direction service 
in rush hours. This uniform load, due to 
continuous operation, will be less than one- 
seventh of the peak power load required 
for a single 10 car subway train. 


With 4,000 seats per mile of train, the 
express, traveling at an average speed of 
20 miles an hour, carries 80,000 seats past 
any given point every hour. Put three seats 
on each local car and you increase this 
number to 91,000 seats an hour. The [n- 
terboro, Seventh Avenue, subway in New 
York, furnishes only 24,500 seats an hour 
past a given point, says Storer. With 58,- 
200 standing passengers, the total capacity 
would still be 8,000 an hour less than the 
number of seats on the Biway. 


< > > 


Each саг is 12 feet long. Ends are curved 
so they will move around sharp curves 
without separating. There is only one pair 
of wheels under each car, this being placed 
near one end. The weight of the free end 
is carried by the wheels of the next car. 
'Tracks are greased to lessen the noise and 
there are no brakes or loose parts to rattle. 


FLOOR PLAN OF BIWAY SYSTEM 


NU 
D 


DIRECTION OF TRAVEL 
o o 


e 
O LOCAL PLATFORM 
(> 


STATIONARY PLATFORM 


Driving motors are stationary beneath 
the tracks at intervals of about 1,000 feet. 
This greatly reduces another operating 
noise. Running lengthwise beneath each 
train is а “Т” section, the flange of which 
runs between driving wheels of the motors. 
Operation of the entire system is so timed 
that the stopping and transfer intervals are 
positive and automatic. Error is impossible. 

Control buttons or switches at each 
power station and at frequent points along 
the route enable attendants to stop the sys- 
tem instantly in case of emergency. Pro- 
tecting gates, gong signals and other auto- 
matic devices practically eliminate all 
chance of accident. Since both trains and 
the stationary platform are continuous, it 
is impossible for a passenger to fall off and 
get under the wheels. Car floors cover the 
entire track space. 

The wheels do not do the driving. Axles 
carry longitudinal “Т” rails, the flanges of 
which run between vertical shaft rollers or 
drive wheels at power stations located 
every 1,000 feet along the route. These 
stations are like stationary locomotives and 
are in pits beneath the tracks. 

Sets of motors propel the drive-wheels 
which are pressed against the flanges of 
the "T" rails. It is purely an adhesion 
drive. Any motor can be replaced when 


necessary without interrupting service. By 
shutting down the system from 2 a. m. to 
6 a. m. daily, other replacements can be 
made but the simplicity of the construction 
and the speeds of the trains will reduce 
this maintenance to a minimum. 

Resilient type of track construction will 
be used to lessen maintenance and to cush- 
ion shocks and deaden noise. Greasing the 
rails will make for quiet operation. There 
will be no screeching on curve and very 
little flange noise. Wheel loading will 
average 1,500 pounds, never more than 
2,500 pounds. No switches, crossings or 
other special work. Just plain tracks, 
banked on curves with loops at the ends 
of the line. Trains will operate at the same 
maximum speeds at all points. 

There are two sets of driving motors at 
each station. In each set two 50-horse- 
power motors and two 100-horsepower 
motors drive the express train at each 
power station. The 100-horsepower motors 
drive the local from each power applica- 
tion. This gives a total of 5,000 horse- 
power of motor capacity per mile for the 
two platforms. However, the arrangement 
of the motors is such that not more than 
750 horsepower will ever be taken from 
the outside line. 

АП stations are controlled from one cen- 
tral control point and the entire system, 
starts, stops, signals, gates and speeds are 


3 CROSS SECTION OF BIWAY SYSTEM 


S/DEWALK 


STATIONARY | 
PLATFORM 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 60 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


ARCHITECTS' VISUALIZATION ОЕ BI-WAY SYSTEM TO RELIEVE 
CONGESTION IN OUR LARGE CITIES 


so timed and synchronized that operation 
is infallible. 

Engineering features prevent the loss 
of considerable power. As the local slows 
down for a stop it gives up power to the 
express, which is increasing its speed at 
that portion of the cycle. When the local 
is picking up speed to match that of the 
express, the latter is slowing from 22 to 
17 miles an hour and gives power it no 
longer needs back to the accelerating local. 
No energy is burned up in brake shoes. 

Working at its maximum capacity, the 
Eighth Avenue subway, New York, with 
10-саг trains on both tracks, 280 passen- 
gers per car, 22 trains an hour on the ex- 
press track and 25 on the local, could seat 
only 34,200 past any given point in an 
hour, according to Storer. The Biway will 
almost triple that figure. 


It is estimated that the time spent on the 
average ride will be five minutes less than 
on the subway. Frequent entrances will 
take people off the street more quickly and 
distribute them with the same speed. Walks 
at each end of the ride will be shortened 
because one can always have the local plat- 
form within 300 feet of any desired point. 


Entrances from the street will be at in- 
tervals of 100 yards or less. Those for the 
subway express trains are a mile apart. The 
Biway will also have entrances from prac- 
tically every building along its route. An 
average ride on the Biway will consume 
five minutes less time than the same ride on 
the subway, counting time from starting 
point to destination. 


Frequent entrances and frequent stops 
will move dense crowds more rapidly than 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER 4 61 p DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


is possible with present systems. There will 
be no danger of injury to passengers. 

Construction details and possibility of 
sound-proofing will make the Biway com- 
paratively quiet in operation. Beneath city 
sidewalks, it will greatly increase the value 
of basement rooms. At other levels, it will 
produce corresponding increases by adding 
to the usefulness of the floors at those 
levels. 

Although no such systems have been 
built and no descriptive literature is avail- 
able, Norman Wilson Storer, consulting 
railway engineer for Westinghouse, who 
has spent several years evolving the Biway 
system, explains some of its essential fea- 
tures. 

First there is a continuous stationary 
platform entirely around the loop served 
by the system. Next to this platform is 
the local or transfer platform, also contin- 
uous, which stops to receive passengers 
every 50 seconds. Between stops it reaches 


a speed of 17 miles an hour, the speed of 
a second continuous platform known as 
the express train. 

Passengers board the first of the moving 
platforms or belts of cars at any point. 
When it is moving at the speed of the sec- 
ond parallel platform, gates open and they 
enter the express where they remain for 
the trip. Between its meetings with the 
local platform, the speed of the express in- 
creases to 22 miles an hour. It never stops. 
There is a loading and a transfer every 50 
seconds. Since each of these movements 
lasts 10 seconds, no one ever waits for a 
train more than 40 seconds. 

Storer points out that the Biway is 
adaptable to any location where continu- 
ous transportation is desired. Where dis- 
tances are short, cost of operation may be 
still further reduced by lowering the speed 
of the trains. Located under sidewalks 
the new system will make a continuous 
arcade of all stores along its route. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 62 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


SPRINKLER 
5Ұзта”? 
T/£ IN TO 
Dortesric 
SUPPLY 
DOMESTIC 
WATER 
SUPPLY 
LINE 


FIRE SPRINKLER PROTECTION DESIGNED FOR RESIDENCES, 
SCHOOLS, CHURCHES AND CLUB BUILDINGS 


NEW LOW COST FOR AUTOMATIC 


SPRINKLER SYSTEM 


"WEN examination of carefully maintained rec- 
ords of insurance underwriters disclosed two 
уегу significant facts. First, that residential fire 
losses in the United States are increasing. For 
example, such losses in 1928 were approximately 
$125,000,000; in 1929, approximately $140,000,- 
000; and in 1930, all over $150,000,000. Second, 
that approximately half of the disastrous fires in 
dwellings originate in basements. Coupled with 
this is the fact that another vast annual fire loss 
occurs in small mercantile buildings, and in smaller 
schools, hospitals, hotels and similar institutions 
where the size of the building does not justify a 
full investment in structural or mechanical fire 
protection. 

Significant to this situation is an announcement 
recently made by Grinnell Company, Inc., Provi- 
dence, R. I., of its "Junior" sprinkler system, which 
includes all the vital elements of standard sprink- 
ler protection. Each element, however, has been 
especially designed for ease of installation, effi- 
ciency of operation, and economy. 

Automatic sprinkler protection has been proved 
over many years as the best form of fire protec- 
tion for large structures. Now it is available for 
existing and new residences, and for small build- 
ings of all types. The cost is amazingly low. For 


the protection of a residence basement the cost 
installed will range from $65 to approximately 
$100. 

The system itself, as shown in the accompanying 
illustration, consists of a flexible copper tubing 
attached to the domestic water supply. On the 
tubing at proper intervals there is mounted a spe- 
cially designed sprinkler head. The system also 
has an alarm feature which is provided by a com- 
pact brass alarm valve. This system can be ex- 
tended to other points of hazard in the residence, 
such as kitchen, attic or garage, at very little ad- 
ditional cost, Once installed it is constantly ready 
for operation, but there is no maintenance cost. 
Thus when the owner makes this small investment 
he materially reduces the fire hazard because it is 
impossible for fire originating in the protected 
areas to spread sufficiently to cause any material 
damage. 

The system is equally applicable to fire hazards 
in smaller apartment buildings, mercantile occu- 
pancies, and small hospitals, schools, churches and 
clubs. The manufacturers state that this is the most 
economical and efficient form of fire protection 
yet made available to owners of small buildings of 
any type. The installation can be made in a few 
hours by local plumbers. 


<<: > 


« « « « With the Architects » » » » 


S. В. ARCHITECTURAL CLUB 

San Francisco Architectural Club held its 31st 
annual hi jinks the night of December 10th. The 
entire program was conducted by the National 
Broadcasting Company talent. The festivities con- 
cluded with cabaret dancing and refreshments. 
There was a large turn out in spite of the depres- 
sion, the boys wishing to forget their troubles for 
a night at least. 

At the regular meeting of the club December 
7th Harold Wagner gave an interesting talk with 
the aid of lantern slides on his recent trip to Eur- 
ope. At the business session officers for the en- 
suing year were nominated. 

The club members have been discussing among 
themselves the considerable sums of money now 
being spent by the San Francisco and East Bay 
architects for publicity work. Many think this an 
inopportune time and feel that much of the money 
thus expended could be used as a fund to aid the 
many architects and draftsmen out of work and 
in sore need of financial assistance. 


JAIL PLANS COMPLETED 

Plans and specifications have been completed 
by Albert F. Roller and Dodge A. Riedy for the 
proposed new County Jail to be built near San 
Bruno for the City and County of San Francisco. 
Funds amounting to $800,000 are available. Be- 
cause Messrs. Roller and Riedy were employed 
to prepare the plans on a six percent commission 
basis, Adolph Uh! complained to the Supervisors 
that a considerable saving could have been made 
had competitive bids for the work been received. 
Mr. Uhl probably is not aware of the fact that 
architects do not publicly bid against each other 
for work, such procedure having long since been 
deemed unethical. 


CHRISTMAS JINKS 
The second annual joint Christmas Jinks din- 
ner given by the Producers' Council Club, Ameri- 
can Institute of Architects and State Association 
of California Architects, was held at the Engi- 
neers’ Club, San Francisco, Wednesday, Decem- 
ber 21. Santa Claus gave out presents galore and 

a most enjoyable evening was spent. 


SHOW SKETCHES TO UNIVERSITIES 

Ralph Bishop, in the office of Sutton, Whitney 
& Dugan, Tacoma, Wash. whose intimate 
sketches have been published from time to time 
in THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER, recently paid 
a visit to several of the northern universities in 
company with P. G. Ball of Tacoma. Mr. Bishop 
took with him his sketches of Venice and studies 
of Tress, also Mr. Ball's book of London, and 
they were exhibited two days each at Washing- 
ton State College in Pullman, University of Idaho 
at Moscow and in Graham's auditorium, Spokane. 
The exhibits attracted quite some interest among 
the students and others and were of considerable 
educational value, according to a letter from Mr. 
Bishop addressed to the editor of this magazine. 
Some more of Mr. Bishop's clever sketches will 
be published in the near future. 


WILLIS POLK 6 COMPANY BUSY 
The office of Willis Polk & Company, San 


Francisco, is busy preparing plans for several 
large residences in the Peninsula District, includ- 
ing a $20,000 Spanish house in Hillsborough for 
Lloyd С. Simpson; a $20,000 English dwelling in 
the Carolands Tract, Hillsborough, for C. C. 
Young, and a $12,000 Spanish Colonial home in 
Hayden Road, Hillsborough, for Hugh L. Clary. 
Quite a few lovely homes have been built by this 
firm down the Peninsula during the past two 
or three years, and it is planned to show photos 
and plans of these in an early issue of THE Авсн- 
ITECT AND ENGINEER. 


LOSES VALUABLE SKETCH 


One of Wm. Woollett's Hoover Dam sketches, 
a number of which have been published in THE 
ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER, and have aroused con- 
siderable favorable comment, was recently stolen 
from the Art Commission room in the Los Ап- 
geles City Hall, where it was on exhibition. The 
etching, valued at $200, shows the Six Companies’ 
concrete mixing plant at the Hoover Dam site. A 
reward will be paid for information leading to the 
recovery of the sketch. 


4 < р i 


MARKET BUILDINGS 

'The Henslee Corporation, which has been oper- 
ating in Southern California and has built more 
than fifty market buildings in that section of the 
State, will divide its activities in Northern and 
Central California the coming year. It has had 
plans prepared for a $10,000 market in Richmond 
by H. A. Minton and a $100,000 building at 20th 
Street and Telegraph Avenue, Oakland. The 
preliminary plans for the latter have been drawn 
by H. C. Britt, 366-17th Street, Oakland, which 
address is the temporary headquarters of the 
Henslee Corporation. Some thirty or more market 
buildings are planned for San Francisco and the 
Bay region. 


RESIDENCE CONTRACT 

А contract has been awarded by Henry H. 
Gutterson, architect of San Francisco, for the 
erection of a two story frame and stucco residence 
in Avalon Court, Berkeley, for Thomas Telfer. 
The owner recently sold his beautiful English 
home in the Claremont District, the plans for 
which were made by William Schirmer. The 
new Telfer home will cost in the neighborhood 
of $20,000. 


BAY BRIDGE BEING FIGURED 

The first unit of the new $75,000,000 San Fran- 
cisco-Oakland Bay Bridge is out for figures, bids 
to be opened by the State Department of Engi- 
neering on February 2nd. The work will consist 
of five reinforced concrete piers and the estimated 
cost is $9,000,000. Many contractors from all 
sections of the United States have asked for plans 
and specifications. 


ENGLISH HOME 

Plans have been prepared by Edwin L. Snyder, 
architect of Berkeley, for an English home on 
Shasta Road, Berkeley, for J. F. Pearce, sales 
manager of the Smith Lumber Company. The 
house will cost approximately $5000. 

Mr. Snyder has also prepared plans for a one 
story Class C store building in North Oakland, 
estimated to cost $10,000. 


PARAFFINE FACTORY ADDITION 
The Paraffine Companies, Inc., has had plans 
prepared by its engineer, Leland S. Rossener, 233 
Sansome Street, San Francisco, for a one story 
steel, concrete and hollow tile inlaid linoleum fac- 
tory at Emeryville. Twenty - eight general con- 
tractors figured the work. 


OIL SERVICE STATIONS 

The several major oil companies have approp- 
riated funds for a somewhat pretentious building 
program the coming year. The Shell Company 
alone, it is understood, will spend $400,000 for 
new stations in Northern and Central California. 
Some twenty-eight locations in the East Bay зес- 
tion will be improved, it is announced. These sta- 
tions will vary in cost from $3500 to $7500 each. 

The Standard Oil Company is also planning 
an extensive building program. 


MODESTO MORTUARY 

Plans have been completed in the office of Rus- 
sell Guerne De Lappe, 374-17th Street, Oakland, 
for a $50,000 reinforced concrete mortuary for the 
Shannon Funeral Company in Modesto. Besides 
a chapel, there will be a casket display room and 
garage. The building will have a terra cotta tile 
roof. The same architect has prepared prelimi- 
nary drawings for a frame and stucco residence 
in Santa Rosa. 


IN MEMORY OF MR. HOWARD 

The alumni of the Department of Architecture, 
University of California, paid its respects to the 
memory of the late Professor John Galen Howard 
on December 11th with the setting of a memorial 
tablet in the pavement of the Campanile Espla- 
nade, on the University campus, Berkeley. 

Following the dedication those present viewed 
an exhibit of Mr. Howard's sketches at the Arch- 
itecture Building. 


OFFICE AND WAREHOUSE 
Martin Stelling, Jr. is the owner of a one story, 
reinforced concrete warehouse and office building, 
to be erected at 6th and Bryant Streets, San Fran- 


. cisco, for the Russia Cement Company. The esti- 


mated cost is $15,000. 


FEDERAL OFFICE BUILDING 
Plans for the $300,000 Federal office building 
in the San Francisco Civic Center by Arthur 
Brown, Jr., have been finally approved at Wash- 
ington, and contracts are expected to be awarded 
within the next thirty days. 


SAN MATEO RESIDENCE 
Chester H. Treichel of Oakland, recently com- 
pleted drawings for a two story, eight room Span- 


ish residence on Virginia Avenue, San Mateo, for 
Milton J. Hallahan. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 65 » DECEMBER, NINETEEN THIRTY-TWO 


SPRING GARDEN CONTEST 


A contest for the design of the 1933 Spring 
Garden Show is announced by the Board of Di- 
rectors. According to Abe P. Leach, president of 
the board, valuable cash prizes are offered to win- 
ners in the competition which is open to properly 
qualified landscape architects, engineers, artists 
and students of garden design throughout the 
State. A total of $275 has been set aside as cash 
awards. 

The success of the Garden Show has been due 
in a large measure to the adherence to the motto 
of the organization, "A cooperative effort." In 
speaking of the forthcoming competition, Howard 
Gilkey, director of the show and designer of the 
previous presentations, said, “It is our purpose to 
carry the idea of cooperation and friendly rivalry 
into every phase of our activities. Hence, we are 
giving this opportunity to all the landscape archi- 
tects and garden designers of the State." 

Many new and interesting features are being 
planned to make the forthcoming production better 
than the last one, which was heralded as one of 
the most successful displays held in the entire 
country. The official tabulation of paid attendance 
was 50,500. 


Rules of the competition will be those prescribed 
by the American Society of Landscape Architects. 
The Pacific Coast Chapter of that saciety is ac- 
tively sponsoring the contest, with Professor John 
W. Gregg, head of the division of Landscape De- 
sign in the University of California, as profes- 
sional advisor and chairman of the committee. 
Other members are Frederick М. Evans, City 
Landscape Architect of Sacramento, and Thomas 
Vint of the National Park Service. 

All persons desiring to compete should com- 
municate in writing with Abe P. Leach, Tribune 
Tower, Oakland, California. 


RECONDITIONING WORK 


The office of George W. Kelham, San Fran- 
cisco, has completed plans for reconditioning the 
Class A Balfour office building on California 
Street, San Francisco, the work to include paint- 
ing, waterproofing, etc. Similar improvements are 


planned for another San Francisco office building 
by G. A. Lansburgh, architect. 


GARDNER DAILEY BUSY 
New work in the office of Gardner Dailey, 210 
Post Street, San Francisco, includes alterations 
and additions to an English home, Woodside, San 
Mateo County, for Mrs. Paul Fay, and brick 
veneer stables and garage at Woodside for 


George Whittell, Jr. 


66 


MODERN ARCHITECTURE 

That the San Francisco Bay Region, long dis- 
tinguished for its Old World charm and unsur- 
passed natural beauty, is rapidly taking on in its 
skyline the aspect of the new world architecture, 
was illustrated by Sheldon Cheney, authority on 
modernism, in a discussion of "Modern Archi- 
tecture,” at Guild Hall on the campus of the Cali- 
fornia School of Arts and Crafts, in Oakland. 

Mr. Cheney's recent survey of the modern 
architecture of Europe, together with his personal 
contacts with the leading architects abroad and in 
America gave added interest to his lecture. 

Color renderings were shown of examples of 
modern architecture in the Bay Region. Included 
in this collection were the Telephone Building of 
San Francisco, the Stock Exchange Luncheon 
Club, 450 Sutter Street, and the Paramount Thea- 
ter of Oakland. Unusual examples illustrating the 
conformity of modern architecture to the new sci- 
entific principles of construction and living today 
were exhibited through the courtesy of Timothy 
L. Pflueger, of Miller & Pflueger, architects of the 
buildings mentioned above. 


THANK YOU! 
Editor THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER: 

Permit me to congratulate you on your splendid 
issue of last month showing the San Francisco 
War Memorial group. To me it seemed the num- 
ber was without a flaw — articles were excellent 
and illustrations the best I have seen anywhere. 
The photographs were all artistic, and particu- 
larly interesting and lovely, was the glimpse of 
the opera house facade through a window in the 
City Hall. 

San Francisco, and the entire Pacific Coast for 
that matter, may well be proud of its ARCHITECT 
AND ENGINEER magazine. 

Sincerely, 
С. ALBERT Гамзвивсн, A.I.A. 
San Francisco, California. 


SAN JOSE THEATER 
Frederick H. Reimers, architect of San Fran- 
cisco, has completed plans for a $35,000 moving 
picture theater in San Jose for the Liberty Amuse- 
ment Company. He also has prepared plans for 
two residence-apartments in San Francisco. 


SAN JOSE HOME 


Charles H. McKenzie, Twohy Building, San 
Jose, prepared the plans for a two story frame 
and stucco residence to be built on 7th Street, San 
Jose, for Mrs. Emily Kaiser for $4500. 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


Index to Advertising Announcements 


For Classified List of Advertisers see Pages 93, 94, 95 


A 
American Marble Co. . mentor 256 
Amcrican Rolling Mill . Е 0097 
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. 2205 
Anderson and Ringrose .................................... 92 
APSE М, Саа на TEE 90 
В 
Bass-Heuter Paint Со. 4... .....................Back Cover 
Bites Garpenter Фо 91 
Bay State Brick & Cement ол БАТА 2. 81 
L. Н. Bennett Co., Ltd. . " pu iS 
Braun-Steeple Co., ИИИ 90 
Brown Hardwood Co., р. 83 
С 
(Са ОС Пос Samuel eee 83 
(аш ога Sales Со. .........................................- 81 
California Shade Cloth Co., Inc. ...................- 83 
(Оа ( Stig, QUE eet ETE 7 
Clervi Marble & Mosaic Со. ......................-..... 89 
Clinton Construction Co. .................................. 85 
Cook Marble Co, Ray .................................... 87 
(Отеле Оошрәапу.................................................. 88 
(Сет МЕЙ! О LE 79 
D 
Dager [тее Surgery Gon а. 2 
Бао экесі Broducts © 91 
ipclBNfontesPropektiese ee 86 
iDidkay Chy Mis, бол... 86 
Dinwiddie Construction Co. ........................... 92 
F 
Жа есеипсен ео. 89 
Forderer Cornice Works ................................... 88 
IRemestnamotce ЮДЫ а ои 91 
| G 
Garnett Young & Company ......................... 88 
Cemal Roofing Соз 90 
Ска Бгз. Моо 86 
(adding? McBean @ Со. — — 8 
Golden Gate Atlas Materials Co. ...................... 87 
Gree, JW ВНЕС I eee . ЁШ 
Grinnell Company of the Pacific взше 87 
лм Cornice Works Ес 86 
Gunn, Carle е Company)... ese 83 
H 
Haws Sanitary Drinking Faucet Co. ................ 79 
осо Robert NV 2-22. 88 
ШОШ ОЕ асот 89 
J 
Шоп Qu 02 Wu 90 
КОО она 2. 99 
jose оек сео 3 
осот рассо аа а 84 
K 
Kenane e Boiler Corp. -eaii 86 
Kasma IMa (Оо. СС 85 


L 


Larsen & Larsen ee eee ош ы 52 
Leather Mat Mfg. Coe c мш ж 
Lesher, Н. M. Е NEM UE eus BE 
Lindgren = Swinerton, peu s 
M 
MacDonaldi & а 
MacC nuer ааа 84 
Ma ССМ атаа о e 87 
MeNeard Brick Ооа 90 
MercurysBress з-с ООО 
Mueller Co. ......... NEMESIS o E 
Mullen Manufacturing Со. ы Та oe 90 
Musto Sons Keenan Co., Joseph ...................... 86 
N 
National Lead Company ..................... Back Cover 
О 
Ocean Shore Iron Works mmnm 89 
Otis Elevator бора 2nd Cover 
P 
Pacific Coast Engineering о 92 
Pacific Coast Electrical Bureau _..................... 6 
Pacine Coast Gas ASSOCIAtIG EE 
Раст Coast steel Corp r CB 
Расі Есту о 2 dy 
Рас но Мапа вито Со ааа 91 
Расе Мега Фо Е ааа 77 
Pacific Portland Cement Co. .............---.-.-.--.---- 96 
Palace Hardware (Co === 91 
Paraline лл 1 
Parker Con ше, Ее 89 
Picard, Inc МН леш 88 
Q 
Quandt & Sons, Ae eee ОО 91 
R 
Қасы Зат 89 
Republie ее. 92 
5 
Sandoval Sales Cor е 90 
Santa Fe Lumber Company e-e- 91 
Sisalkraft Со, 2909 С И 88 
Sloane, М 84 
Smith Lumber Co. of Oakland ........ -------- . 87 
Stanley, Works: ЛЕ "ES 
Steelform Contracting Са. 
Сосо (2? Sons e о кн 86 
Sunset Lumber Cor nm 91 
T 
Norme @опрапу дев MM 88 
У 
Мо!Кег б Con Муш. хл шке 89 
Майпо таш Gagan 5 АМЕ (Об eee 83 
ху 
е Батса Вар 
Western Iron Works ое 92 
Woodilumber Фо 85 
52 
Young © Нотвтлеуее- 222 87 


* Appears alternate months 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


67 


COMPETITIONS FOR ROME PRIZES 


The American Academy in Rome has an- 
nounced its annual competitions for fellowships in 
architecture, landscape architecture, painting, 
sculpture and musical composition. 

In architecture the Daniel Н. Burnham fellow- 
ship is to be awarded, and in landscape archi- 
tecture the Kate Lancaster Brewster fellowship. 

The competitions are open to unmarried men 
not over 30 years of age who are citizens of the 
United States. The stipend of each fellowship is 
$1250 a year with an allowance of $300 for trans- 
portation to and from Rome. Residence and studio 
are provided without charge at the Academy, and 
the total estimated value of each fellowship is 
about $2000 a year. 

The term of each fellowship is two years in 
architecture and landscape architecture and three 
years in painting and sculpture. Fellows have op- 
portunity for extensive travel and for making con- 
tacts with leading European artists and scholars. 


The Grand Central Art Galleries of New York 
City will present free membership in the Galleries 
to the painter and sculptor who win the Rome 
Prize and fulfill the obligations of the fellowship. 


Entries for competitions will be received until 
February 1, Circulars of information and appli- 
cation blanks may be obtained by addressing Ros- 
coe Guernsey, Executive Secretary, American 


Academy in Rome, 101 Park Avenue, New York. 


CHURCH ARCHITECTURE 


The eleventh annual session of the North 
American Conference on Church Architecture will 
be held in the Stevens Hotel, Chicago, February 
23, 24 and 25, simultaneously with the Christian 
Herald annual exhibit of ecclesiastical architecture. 
The program will include discussions of significant 
aspects and trends of present-day church design, 
a forecast of American church building, discussion 
of church modernization, the modern develop- 
ment of historic styles in church design, and the 
relationship of church building to city planning. 
There will also be scheduled visits to outstanding 
ecclesiastical buildings in Chicago and the annual 
Christian Herald dinner to architects, pastors and 
laymen of churches contemplating building pro- 
grams and others interested in church building. 

The display of ecclesiastical architecture, which 
has for several years attracted considerable atten- 
tion, will be notable. Architects who have done 
church work which they feel merits notice, are 
invited to correspond with Wayne О, Miller, 
Church Building Service Dept., Christian Herald, 
Chicago, Ш. 


68 


CONTRACTORS FILE SUIT 


In a suit on file in San Francisco Superior Court, 
three San Francisco contractors seek damages 
amounting to $65,067.50 from the Columbia Cas- 
ualty Company, alleging that failure of the com- 
pany to deliver a bond after they had complied 
with its requirements caused them to lose a $650,- 
675 government contract for buildings at Hamilton 
Field, Marin county. 

The contractors are J. D. Hannah, J. S. Samp- 
son and Seabury B. Peterson. 

On June 20, they allege, they submitted bids to 
the United States Government for construction of 
barracks, warehouses, shops and other buildings at 
Hamilton Field, the job aggregating $650,675. 
The bid was accepted by the government June 21. 

On August 16, according to the complaint, the 
contractors entered into an agreement with the 
Colombia Casualty Company whereby the com- 
pany was to provide a bond for faithful perform- 
ance of the work, as soon as the contractors had 
deposited $20,000 with the Canadian Bank of 
Commerce, to be used as working capital, drawn 
on jointly by the contractors and the surety. 

The stipulated amount was deposited in the 
bank August 18, the plaintiffs say. According to 
their agreement with the government, the bond 
was to be delivered when the contract was signed. 

The casualty company, it is alleged, then re- 
fused to deliver the bond. 

When the bond was not delivered by August 
20 the government ruled that the contractors were 
in default, and cancelled the award. 

Performance of the work would have cost them 
$585,607.50, the plaintiffs assert. By losing the 
contract they lost a profit of $65,067.50, the 
amount they seek to recover from the casualty 
company. 


DECISION FAVORS ARCHITECTS 


The right of an architect to collect for the use 
of plans prepared, although such plans are not 
finally used by his client, was again upheld by 
a decision in the San Francisco municipal court 
on November 28. 

Judge Joseph M. Golden held in favor of the 
plaintiff in the case of a suit brought by Italo 
Zanolini, architect, against Alfredo Rossi. Zano- 
lini was given a judgment of $588.60 and costs 
when it was shown he had prepared plans on an 
order by Rossi. 

The case involved preliminary work done on a 
projected commercial market. Subsequent plans 
and specifications prepared by another man were 
accepted by Rossi and the building was erected 
under the latter's supervision. Zanolini thereafter 
sued to collect his fee. 


The Architect and Engineer, Decembcr, 1932 


Estimator’s Guide 


Giving Cost of Building Materials, Wage Scale, Etc. 


Amounts quoted are figuring prices and are made up from average quotations 
furnished by material houses to three leading contracting firms of San Francisco. 


Note New Wage Scale 


АП prices and wages quoted are for 
San Francisco and the Bay District. 
There may be slight fluctuation of 
prices in the interior and southern 
part of the state. Freight cartage, at 
least, must be added in figuring coun- 
try work. 

Overtime in wage scale should be 
credited with time and a half, Sunday 
and holidays double. 


Bond—1%% amount of contract. 


Brick work— 

Common, $26 to $32 per 1000 laid, 
(according to class of work). 

Face, $60 to $80 per 1000 laid, (ac- 
cording to class of work). 

Brick Steps, using pressed brick, 
$.85 lin. ft. 

Brick Walls, using pressed brick on 
edge, 55c sq. ft. (Foundations ex- 


tra.) 

Brick Veneer on frame buildings, 
$.60 sq. ft. 

Common, f. 0. b. cars, $14.00 plus 
cartage. 


Face, f.o.b. cars, $38.00 per 1000, 
carload lots. 


HOLLOW TILE FIREPROOFING (f.o.b. job) 
STD Ия $ 68.00 per M 
4x12x12 in . 76.50 per M 
6x12x12 in 105.00 per M 
$x12x12 in 170.00 per M 


HOLLOW BUILDING TILE (f.o.b. job) 
carload lota). 


ха 2. 2 $76.50 
(хх сс о с... 


Composition Floors — 18c to 30c рег 
Sq. ft. In large quantities, 18c per 
sq. ft. laid. 

Mosaic Floors—80c per sq. ft. 

Duraflex Floor—23c to 30c sq. ft. 

Rubber Tile—50c per sq. ft. 

Тега22о Floors—40c to 55с per sq. ft. 


Terazzo Steps—$1.50 lin. ft. 


Concrete Work (material at San Fran- 
cisco bunkers) — Quotations below 
2000 lbs. to the ton. 


No. 3 rock, at bunkers........ $1.66 per ton 
No. 4 rock, at bunkers...... 1.65 per ton 
Elliott top gravel, at bnkrs. 1.75 per ton 
Washed gravel, at bunkrs 1.75 per ton 
Vliott top gravel, at bnkrs. 1.75 per ton 
City gravel, at bunkers.... 1.40 per ton 
River sand, at bunkers...... 1.50 per ton 
Delivered bank sand............ 1.10 cu yd. 


Note—Above prices are subject to dis- 
count of 10c per ton on invoices paid 
on or before the 15th of month, fol- 
lowing delivery. 

SAND 


Del Monte, $1.75 to $3.00 per ton. 
Fan Shell Beach (car lots, f. o.b. 


The Architect and Engincer, December, 1932 


Lake Majella), $2.75 to $4.00 per 
ton. 
Cement, $2.25 per bbl. in paper sks. 
Cement (f.o.b. Job, S. F.) $2.45 per 


bbl. 
Cement (f.o.b. Job, Oak.) $2.45 per 
per bb 
Rebate of 10 cents bbl, cash in 15 
days. 
Medusa “White” .......... $ 8.50 per bbl. 


Forms, Labors average 22.00 per M. 
Average cost of concrete in place, 
exclusive of forms, 28c per cu. ft. 
4-inch concrete basement 
floor.......... 1215c to 18%с per sq. ft. 
4% inch Concrete Basement 
ВОО 18с to 14с per sq. ft. 
2-inch rat-proofing...016c per sq. ft. 
Concrete Steps.......... $1.00 per lin. ft. 


Damipproofing and Waterproofing— 
Two-coat work, 15с per yard. 
Membrane waterproofing—4 layers 

of saturated felt, $4.00 per square. 
Hot coating work, $1.80 per square. 
Meduca Waterproofing, 15c per ІҺ., 
San Francisco Warehouse. 


Electric Wiring — $2.75 to $8.50 per 
outlet for conduit work (including 
switches). 

Knob and tube average $2.25 to 


$5.00 per outlet, including 
switches. 
Elevators— 


Prices vary according to capacity, 
speed and type. Consult elevator 
companies. Average cost of in- 
stalling an automatic elevator in 
four-story building, $2450; direct 
automatic, about $2400. 


Excavation— 

Sand, 40 cents; clay or sbale, 90c 
per yard. 

Teams, $10.00 per day. 

Trucks, $18 to $25 per day. 

Above figures are an average witb- 
out water. Steam shovel work in 
large quantities, less; hard ma- 
terial, such as rock, will run con- 
siderably more. 


Fire Escapes— 
Ten-foot balcony, with stairs, 
$65.00 per balcony. 


Glass (consult with manufacturers)— 

Double strength window glass, 15c 
per square foot. 

Quartz Lite, 50c per square foot. 
Plate 80c per square foot. 

Art, $1.00 up per square foot. 

Wire (for skylights), 27c per square 
foot. 

Obscure glass, 25c square foot. 

Note—Add extra for setting. 


Heating— 
Average, $1.60 per sq. ft. of radia- 
tion, according to conditlons. 


lroun—Cost of ornamental iron, cast 
iron, etc., depends on designs. 
Lumber (prices delivered to bldg. site) 
Common, $18.00 per M (average). 
Common O.P. select, average, $22.00 
per M. 


1x6 No. 3--Form Lumber $14.00 per M 


1x4 No. 1 flooring УС. 42.00 per M 
1x4 No. 2 flooring . 36.00 per M 
1х4 No. 3 flooring . 30.00 per M 


1x6 No. 2 flooring 42.00 per M 
114х4 and 6 No. 2 flooring... . 50.00 рег M 
Slash grain— 


1x4 Мо. 2 flooring .... $30.00 per M 


1x4 No. 3 flooring .... 26.00 per M 

No. 1 common run T. & G. 26.00 per M 

Шала! Ела ES 4.15 per M 
Shingles (add cartage to prices 


quoted)— 


Redwood, No. 1 ....___.._.............$ .85 per bdle. 
Redwood, No. 2 .. -- „65 per bdle. 
Red Cedar ...............-.... .85 per bdle. 


Hardwood Flooring (delivered to 
building)— 

13-16x3!;" T & С Maple $ 90.00 M ft. 
1 1-16х21,” T & С Maple 117.00 M ft. 
T«x316 su. edge Maple 119.00 M ft. 
18-16x214" 3х2” 5-16х2” 

T&G T&G Sq.Ed. 

Сїт. Qtd. Oak ..$175.00 М $125.00 M $158 M 
Sel. Qtd. Oak .... 115.00 М 95.00 М 110M 
Cir. Pla. Oak .... 110.009 М 87.00M 95M 
Sel. Pla. Oak — 106.00 М 68.00M 82M 
Clear Маше ........ 110.00 М 82.00 М 
Laying & Finishing 14с №. 12 ft. 
Wage—Floor layers, $9.00 per day. 


llc ft. 


Building Paper— 
1 ply per 1000 ft. 
2 ply per 1000 ft. 
3 ply per 1000 ft. 
Sisalkraft, 500 ft. 
Sash cord com. No. 7... 
Sash cord com. No. 8. ~ 1.10 per 100 ft. 
Sash cord spot No. 7...—... 1.60 per 100 ft. 
Sash cord spot No. 8........ 1.90 рег 100 ft, 
Sash weights cast iron, $45.00 ton 
Nails, $2.85 base. 

Belgian nails, $2.60 base. 


Millwork— 

O. P. $74.00 per 1000. R. W., $80.00 
per 1000 (delivered). 

Double hung box window frames, 
average, with trim, $5.00 and up. 
each. 

Doors, including trim (single panel, 
134 in. Oregon pine) $5.75 and up, 
each. 

Doors, including trim (five panel, 
134 in. Oregon pine) $5.50 each. 

Screen doors, $3.50 each. 

Patent screen windows, 20c a sq. ft. 
Cases for kitchen pantries seven ft. 
high, per lineal ft., $4.25 each. 
Dining room cases, $5.25 per lineal 

foot. 

Labor—Rough carpentry, warehouse 
heavy framing (average), $11.00 
рег М. 

For smaller work, average, $22 to 
$30 per 1000. 


69 


Marble— (See Dealers) 


Paluting— 
Two-coat work 
Three-coat work . 36c per yard 
Cold Water Painting 8c per yard 
Whitewashing .................. 4c per yard 
Turpentine, 70c per gal, in cans and 

80с per gal. in drums. 
Raw Linseed Oil—62c gal. in bbls. 
Boiled Linseed Oil—65c gal. in bbls. 
Medusa Portland Cement Paint, 20c 
per 1b. 
Carter or Dntch Boy White Lead in 
Oil (in steel kegs). 
Per Lb. 


1 ton lots, 100 lbs. net weight 10%c 
500 lb. and less than 1 ton lots 11c 
Less than 500 10. lots.................. 11%с 
Dutch Boy Dry Red Lead and 
Litharge (in steel kegs). 
1 ton lots, 100 1b. kegs, net wt. 10%c 
500 Ib. and less than 1 ton lots 11с 
Less than 500 Ib. lots.................. 11%с 
Red Lead Іп Oil (in steel kegs) 
1 ton lots, 100 1b. keg s,net. wt. 12%с 
500 lb. and less than 1 ton lots 12%с 
Less than 500 lb. lots .13c 
Note—Accessibility and conditions 
cause wide variance of costs. 


27c per yard 


Putent Chimneys— 

Шаа ьан а $ .90 lineal foot 

... 1.80 lineal foot 
. 1.50 lineal foot 

. 1.75 lineal foot 


12-inch. 


Plastering—Interior— 
Уага 
1 coat, brown mortar only, wood lath....$0.36 
2 ee lime mortar hard finish, wood qs 
АЙП .....-..6»....»-......-.% comme ccnseciercecenctevsessccesserons 40 


8 coats, metal lath and plaater 
Keene cement on metal lath .. 
Ceilings with % hot roll chann 
paa a ооо ы та а ат лы 
Ceilings with 34 hot roll channels metal 
Iathinlasteredg ccm ee 1.30 
Shingle partition % channel lath 1 aide .60 
Single partition % channel latb 2 sides 


cuimmchesbthick c 2.00 
4-inch double partition 34 channel lath 
2 Biden 02-2. 1.20 
4-inch double partition 34 channel lath 
2 sides plastered ........—— suns 2. 2.25 
Plastering—Exterior— 
Yard 
2 coats cement finish, brick or con- 
crete А т ш ос доо $ .90 
2 coats Atlas cement, brick ог con- 
orele wall 1.15 
$ coats cement finish No. 18 gauge 
ӨГӨ Ре eee се, сент ыы 1.60 
8 coats Medusa finish No, 18 gauge 
wireNmesbe 22-і 2.90 
Wood lath, $4.00 per 1000. 
2.5-ІҺ. metal lath (dipped) zm 
2.5-lb. metal lath (zalvanized). .20 
3.4-lb. metal lath (dipped)..... 122 
3.4-ІҺ. metal lath (galvanized). .28 


34-inch hot roll channels, $72 per ton. 
Finish plaster, $16.40 ton; in paper sacks, 
Dealer's commission, $1.00 off above 
quotationa. 
$13.85 (rebate 10c sack). 
Lime, f.o.b. warehouse, $2.25bbl. ;cara, $2,15 
Lime, bulk (ton 2000 Iba.), $16.00 ton, 
Wall Board 5 ply, $48.00 per M. 
Hydrate Lime. $19.50 ton. 


Composition Stuceo—$1.35 to $1.75 per 


sq. yard (applied). 


Plumbing— 


R 


Established by The Impartial Wage Board November 9, 1932. 


From $55.00 per fixture up, accord- 
ing to grade, quantity and runs. 


oofing— 

“Standard” tar and gravel, $5.00 per 
square for 30 squares or over. 
Less than 30 squares, $5.25 per sq. 

Tile, $17.00 to $30.00 per square. 


SAN FRANCISCO BUILDING TRADES WAGE SCALE FOR 1933 


Effective ап а! work January 1, 1933, ta remain. in efect until June 30, 1933, and for sa 
lang thereafter as ecanomic conditions remain substantially unchanged. 


Redwood Shingles, $11.00 per square 
in place. 

Cedar Shingles, $10 sq. in place. 

Recoat, with Gravel. $3.00 per sq. 


Sheet Metal— 
Windows—Metal, $1.80 a sq. foot. 
Fire doors (average), including 
hardware, $2.00 per sq. ft. 


Skylights— 
Copper, $1.00 sq. ft. (not glazed), 
Galvanized iron, 25c sq. ft. (not 
glazed). 


Steel—Structural 
$78 ton (erected), this quotation is 
an average for comparatively 
small quantities. Light truss 
work higher. Plain beams and 
column work in large quantities 
$71 to $75 per ton cost of steel; 
average ‘building, $77.00. 
Stee] Reinforcing— 
$68.00 per ton, set, (average). 


Stone— 
Granite, average, $6.50 cn. foot Ш 
place, 
Sandstone, average Blue, $3.50; 
Boise, $2.60 sq. ft. in place. 
Indiana Limestone, $2.60 per sq. ft. 
in place. 


Store Fronts— 

Copper sash bars for store fronts, 
corner, center and around sides, 
will average 70c per lineal foot. 

Note—Consult with agents. 


Tile — Floor, Wainscot, Ete. — (Ses 
Dealers). 


This scale is based оп an eight-hour day and is to be considered as a minimum and employees of superior 
Skill and craft knowledge may be paid in excess of the amounts set forth herein. 


Journeyman 


CRAFT Mechanics 
Asbestor Workers ......$6.40 
Bricklayera - 9.00 
Bricklayers’ Hodcarriers a 5.60 


Cabinet Workera (Oniside) .. .. 7.20% 
Caisson Workers (Open) Water "Work... 8.00 


Carpenters . и 7.20* 
Cement Finishers zu. 7.20 
Cork Inaulation Worke 7.20 


Electrical Workera ............ _ 8.00 


Electrical Fixture Hangera 7.00 
Elevator Constructors ...... 8.68 
Elevator Constructora’ Helpers 6.08 
Engineers, Portahle and Hoisting 8.00 
Glass Workers (All Classifications) 6.80 
Hardwood Floormen .. 7.20* 
Housemovers . ........... 087 6.40 
Housesmiths, Architectural Iron (Озе 

ае м 7.20 
Honsesmiths, Reinforced Concre 

JHE rr Шол 11410 
*Established by Special Board 

GENE 


1. Eight hours shall constitute a day's work 
for all crafts, except as otherwise noted. 

2. Where less than eizht hours are worked 
pro rata ratea for such shorter period shall 
be paid. 

3. Plasterers' Нойсаггіегз, Bricklayers’ Hod- 
carriers, Roofers' Laborers and Engineers, 
Portable and Hoisting, shall start 15 min- 
utea before other workmen, both at morn- 
ing and at noon. 

4. Five days, consisting of not more than 
eight hours a day, on Monday to Friday 
inclusive, shall conatitute a week's work. 

5. The wages set forth herein shall be con- 
sidered as net wages. 

6. Except as noted the above ratea of pay ap- 
1/2 only to work performed at the job 
al 

7. Transportation costs in excess of twenty- 
five cents each way shall be paid by the 
contractor. 

8. Traveling time in excess of one and one- 
half hours each way shall be paid for at 
straight Ише rates. 


Journeyman 
CRAFT Mechanics 


Iron Workers (Bridge and Structural). 9.60 


Tron Workers (Hoisting Engineers) . 


. 19.00 


Laborers (6-day week) . 5.00 
Lathers, Channel Iron 8.00 
Lathers, All Other 6.80 
Marble Setters . .... 8.00 
Marble Setters' Help 5.00 
Millwrights ......... 7.20* 
Mosaic and Terrazza "Workers (Outsi e) 7.20 
Mosaic and Terrazzo Helpers _ 5.00 
Painiers . 7.00 
Painters, Varnishere and Polishers 
(Outside) ..... 7.00 
Pile Drivers and Wharf Builders | 8.00 
Pile Drivers Engineers 9.00 
Plasterers РС 8.80 
Plasterers' Hodcarriers . 6.00 
Plumbers . .. .. 8.00 
Roofers (АП “classifi 6.40 
Sheet Metal Workers 7.20 
Sprinkler Fitters .. 9.00 
Steam Fitters 8.00 


RAL WORKING CONDITIONS 


9. Overtime shall be paid as follows: For 


the first four houra after the first eight 
hours, time and one-half. All time there- 
after shall be paid double time. Satur- 


days (except Laborers), Sundays and Holi- 
days from 12 midnight of the preceding 
day, shall be paid double time. Irrespec- 
tive of starting time, overtime for Cement 
Finishers shall not commence until after 


eight hours of work. 


10. On Saturday Laborers shall be paid 


11. 


straight time for an eight-hour day. 


Where two shifts are worked in any 
twenty-four hours, shift time shall be 
straight time. Where three shifts are 
worked, eight hours' pay shall be paid 
Eu seven hours on the second and third 
shifta. 


12. All work, except аз noted in paragraph 


18, shall be performed between the hours 


of 8 A. M. and 5 P. M. 


13. In emergencies, or where premises cannot 


be vacated unti] the close of buainess, 


CRAFT Journeyman 
Mechanics 
Stair Builders .. es 7.20: 
Stone Cutters, Soft and Granite 6.80 
Stone Setters, Soft and Granite 8.00 
Stone Derrickmen . 7.20 
Tile Setters ....... 8.00 
Tile Setters’ Helpers 5.00 
Tile, Cork and Rubber m6 7.20 
Welders, Structural Steel Е 
Buildings 2... s 9.60 
Welders, All Others on "Buildings a. 8.00 


Auto Truck Drivers—Less than 2,560 1Ёз. 5.50 
Auto Truck  Drivers—2,500 Iba. to 


4,500) 155 ts 6.00 
Auto Truck Drivers—4,500 Its. to 

6,500 13. .... 6.50 
Anio Truck Drivers 6,500. Tbs. ‘and over 7.00 
General Teamsters, 1 Horse .... .... . 5.50 
General Teamsters, 2 Horaea . 6.00 
General Teamsters, 4 Horses 6.50 
Plow Teamsters, 4 Horses ..... 6.50 
Scraper Teamsters, 2 Horses 6.00 
Scraper Teamsters, 4 Horses . 6.00 


men reporting for work shall work at 
straight time. Any work performed on 
such jebs after midnight shall be paid 
time and one-half up to four houra of 
overtime and double time thereafter (pro- 
vided, that if a new crew ia employed on 
Saturdays, Sundaya or Holidays which has 
not worked during the five preceding work- 
ing days, auch crew shall be paid time 
and one-half. No job can be considered 
as an emergency job until it haa been 
registered with the Industrial Association 
and a determination has been made that 
the job falls within the terms of this 
section). 

14. Recognized holidays to be: New Year's 
Day, Decoration Day, Fourth of July, 
Labor Day, Admission Day, Thanksgiving 
Day, Christmas Day. 

15. Men ordered to report for work, for 
whom no employment ia provided shall he 
entitled to two hours' pay. 

16. This award shall be effective in the City 
and County of San Francisco. 


NOTE: Provision of paragraph 13 appearing in brackets ( ) does not apply to Carpenters, Cabinet Workers (Outside), Hardwood Floormen, Mill- 


wrights, or Stair Builders. 


70 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


1119 


|. Chapter and Club Meetings 


= — — - Е . — —— 


NORTHERN CALIFORNIA CHAPTER 


In observance of “University Night", the 
Northern California Chapter conducted its regu- 
lar meeting at the University of California, in 
Berkeley, on Tuesday evening, October 25, Henry 
H. Gutterson, presiding. 

Dinner was served at the Faculty Club at 6:30. 

Mr. Gutterson announced that it was the an- 
nual meeting of the Chapter and proceeded with 
the prescribed order of business. 

In his annual address the president outlined 
the activities of the Chapter and the board of 
directors during the past year. 

In the matter of a $250 loan, granted by the 
Directors for the expansion of Architecture and 
Building Weekly, it was voted that the borrower 
be released from payment and that the money 
be credited as an expenditure in pursuit of propa- 
ganda work. 


Mr. Evers explained the intent of the Edu- 
cational Fund and his belief that this account 
should be used solely for scholarships or other 
distinctly educational purposes. 


There being no unfinished business, the next 
procedure was the election of officers, which re- 
sulted as follows: John ]. Donovan, president; 
Raymond W. Jeans, vice-president; James Н. 
Mitchell, secretary-treasurer; Henry Н. Gutterson. 
director, two years; Roland I. Stringham, director, 
three years; George R. Klinkhardt, director, three 
years. 


Following his election as president, Mr. Dono- 
van accepted the chair and asked Mr. Ashley to 
present the following resolution, which was unan- 
imously approved: 


Whereas, Our retiring President, Henry H. 
Gutterson, has brought to the administration of 
this high office rare qualities of gentleness. firm- 
ness, human understanding, unselfish devotion, 
unremitting zeal and broad vision; and 


Whereas, All of his actions have reflected great 
credit on the American Institute of Architects and 
this the Northern California Chapter thereof; 
therefore 


Be it Resolved, That we, the Northern Cali- 
fornia Chapter, the American Institute of Arch- 
itects, in annual meeting assembled, do hereby 
express our sincere appreciation of and gratitude 
for the above mentioned qualities and actions of 
our retiring President, Henry H. Gutterson; and 
be it further 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


IMIL— — 


(sr 
ИР 
аз 

а” 
БЕ 
ne 
ak 
a 
= 

- 
op 
c 180 
a 
л 
б 
5: % 
E 
5.2 
TR 
n 0 
OT 

E 
ж< 
9 
NER 
Е 2 
Gier 
9^ 
518 
== 
2 = 
ier 
ae 


minutes of the meeting, verbatim, and that he be 
requested to transmit a copy of these Resolutions 
to our honored retiring President, Henry H. Gut- 
terson. 

There was no further business and the meeting 


adjourned, to reassemble at the Architecture 
Building, where the members were welcomed by 
Warren C. Perry, Director of the School of Arch- 
itecture, members of the faculty and students. 


Here, a pleasant feature was the presentation 
of a scholarship to Malcolm Smith.—]. Н. М. 


ENDORSES WAGE SCHEDULE 


Northern California Chapter, A.I.A., has given 
its endorsement of the wage scale and findings 
of the Impartial Wage Board and has passed a 
resolution urging all architects to include the wage 
scale in future specifications and building con- 
tracts. 


John J. Donovan, president of the Chapter, in 
urging the adoption of the resolution said: "Mem- 
bers of the Chapter can aid materially in adding 
to the stabilizing effects of the Impartial Wage 
Board's award by guaranteeing payment of the 
wages through inclusion of the wage board's 
schedule in all specifications and contracts. San 
Franciscos unique wage-setting procedure has 
commanded universal interest. The co-operation of 
the architects in aiding the Industrial Association 
to guarantee observance of the award will tend 
to insure both the continuance of this procedure 
and stability of building conditions which all rec- 
ognize as essential." 

W. S. Dinwiddie, a member of the Impartial 
Wage Board, addressed the meeting and pointed 
out that in view of the lack of employment, con- 
tractors, owners and architects must do everything 
humanly possibly to see that justice is done to 
the mechanic. 

The resolution follows: 


“Whereas, the Impartial Wage Board met and 
established a minimum wage for the ensuing year, 
therefore be it 

“Resotvep that this Chapter express its ap- 
proval of the findings of the said Impartial Wage 
Board, and request each of its members to place 
a clause in their specifications, that wages for 
labor be paid in accordance with said findings." 


71 


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA CHAPTER 


Southern California Chapter, American Institute 
of Architects, at its November meeting, nominated 
for re-election the following officers: Gordon B. 
Kaufmann, president; Sumner M. Spaulding, vice- 
president; Palmer Sabin, secretary; Paul J. Dun- 
can, treasurer, and Carleton M. Winslow, direc- 
tor for the two-year term. 

Robert H. Orr, president of the State Associa- 
tion of California Architects, reported on matters 
that came before the Association's annual meet- 
ing at Del Monte recently, pertaining to the re- 
striction of the services of governmental archi- 
tectural bureaus to maintenance and supervisory 
duties. А motion was adopted whereby this ques- 
tion will be brought to the attention of the next 
Chapter meeting for action as to the furtherance 
of the program. 

Charles H. Cheney made a report on "Slum 
Clearance and Low Cost Housing as an Aid to 
Recovery." Mr. Cheney is chairman of a special 
Chapter committee which was recently appointed 
to cooperate with a national committee appointed 
by the Institute, with Robert D. Kohn as chair- 
man, for the purpose of stimulating building and 
securing building funds from the Reconstruction 
Finance Corporation. 

The "Honor Awards" committee suggested that 
this year's program be similar to the program held 
last year, selections for awards to be made in 
February. 

А vote of thanks was extended to William 
Richards for his work in preparing a document 
setting forth the architects’ code of ethics. 

Gordon B. Kaufmann, president of the Chapter, 
introduced Royal W. Lescher of Phoenix, Ariz., 
and Edgar F. Bizzantz of Pasadena, both of whom 
are new members. 


OREGON CHAPTER MEETING 


The regular monthly meeting of Oregon Chap- 
ter, A. I. A.,, was held November 15 in the office 
of A. E. Doyle © Associates, Portland. Those 
present were Messrs. Doty, Aandahl, Hemenway, 
Wallwork, Sundeleaf, Jones, Johnson, Holford, 
Jacobberger, Parker, Brookman, Logan, Herzog. 
Johnston and Crowell. 

Messrs. Parker and Herzog, representing the 
Committee on Public Works, submitted a prelimi- 
nary report on the market site question which was 
followed by a lengthy informal discussion. 

Mr. Aandahl reported on the noon meeting of 
the Oregon Building Congress, at which Architect 
Kroner submitted and explained the proposed 
State Building Code, on which a joint committee 
of American Institute of Architects and Registered 
Architects has been working. 


72 


lt was moved, seconded, and carried, that a 
special meeting be held Monday, November 21, to 
act upon the report of committees working on the 
State Building Code. 

On motion of Mr. Holford, seconded by Mr. 
Parker, the Building Laws Committee was in- 
structed to confer with similar committees, or rep- 
resentatives, of the Registered Architects, Oregon 
Building Congress, and the Building Material 
Dealers Credit Association, on the revision of the 
State lien law. 

It was moved and passed that a letter be written 
to the American Institute of Architects headquar- 
ters asking that dues be reduced in an effort to 
retain present membership. The executive com- 
mittee was empowered to authorize the treasurer 
to expend, or loan, small amounts for the relief 
of needy architects and draughtsmen.—W.H.C. 


WASHINGTON STATE CHAPTER 


The regular Chapter meeting for November was 
held in the Gold Room of the New Washington 
Hotel, Seattle, on the evening of Thursday. No- 
vember 3. 


The secretary read a letter from William О. 
Ludlow, chairman of the Institute Committee on 
Industrial Relations, stressing the desirability of 
the Chapter's promoting cooperation with the other 
elements of the building industry through the for- 
mation of a Building Congress. Harlan Thomas 
mentioned for consideration the holding of a joint 
meeting with the Seattle Chapter of the Associated 
General Contractors as had been held in previous 
years. 

А letter was read from Louis LaBaume, chair- 
man of the Institute Committee on Public Works, 
relative to the attitude of the administration and 
Congress on new building construction and the 
employment of architects in connection therewith. 
Following this, President Holmes reported on 
the work of the Washington Architects Incorpor- 
ated; reading correspondence with Assistant Sec- 
retary of the Ттеазигу Ferry К. Heath, and local 
representatives to Congress, relative to the em- 
ployment of local architects. 

Mr. Albertson, chairman of the committee on 
the proposed Chapter By-Law Revision to create a 
tax on salaries and consultation fees in addition to 
the existing tax on commissions, reported inability 
to have a full meeting of the committee on account 
of the illness of one of its members. The two 
members who had met proposed the increasing of 
the limit of exemption to $2,500, and this was 
given as a report of progress. On Mr. Albertson's 
motion definite action by the Chapter was de- 
ferred to a subsequent meeting. 


The Architect and Engincer, December, 1932 


Victor Jones, in reporting for the Chapter Com- 
mittee on Public Information, of which he is chair- 
man, made a plea for more material for the illus- 
trations of future building projects which were 
being presented in the Seattle T'imes. Mr. Aitken, 
chairman of a special committee to investigate the 
copying of plans filed with the Seattle Building 
Department, reported that the committee had writ- 
ten and interviewed Mr. Gaines, head of the de- 
partment, which had finally resulted in a letter 
from Mr. Gaines to the effect that it was not prac- 
ticable to return the plans to the architects who 
had filed them, as had been suggested. 

А letter was read from А. M. Young, giving 
information regarding violations of the Seattle 
Building Code in the erection of apartment houses, 
a matter to which he had given consideration dur- 
ing several former city administrations in conjunc- 
tion with the Association of Apartment House 
Owners. After some discussion it was voted that 
a member of the Chapter be appointed to act with 
the Apartment House Owners Association in tak- 
ing up this matter with the building department. 

The business session being concluded, Donald 
Thomas, chairman of the Program Committee, 
took charge of the meeting and introduced Arch 
Torbitt, who, after a brief reference to his con- 
nection with a proposed Pacific Northwest Expo- 
sition, introduced B. R. Perkins, the speaker of the 
evening. Mr. Perkins gave an interesting account 
of a vast Pacific Northwest exposition project 
which he called the "Beaver Centennial", explain- 
ing the plan for financing and exploitation of the 
great Pacific Northwest. 

The application has been received from Harry 
T. Meyers for Chapter Associate. 

A. Gordon Lumm of Tacoma has been elected 
a Chapter member. Mr. Lumm is a graduate in 
architecture of the University of Minnesota. 


WASHINGTON STATE SOCIETY 


Officers for the ensuing year were nominated at 
the November meeting of the Washington State 
Society of Architects. President John S. Hudson 
presided. The nominating committee comprised 
W. C. Jackson, chairman; Isaac Wright, James 
M. Taylor Jr., R. C. Stanley and Oscar F. Nelson. 

James E. Blackwell, chairman of the public 
building committee, reported on progress on the 
program of obtaining retainers for private archi- 
tects on public buildings to be erected in the State 
of Washington. The Society is cooperating with 
the American Institute of Architects in promoting 
the Washington Architects, Inc., an organization 
designed to obtain work for State architects on 
Federal projects. 


The Architect and Engincer, December, 1932 


SPOKANE SOCIETY OF ARCHITECTS 


Spokane Society of Architects met October 22 
at the Spokane Hotel, Prof. Stanley A. Smith and 
Prof. Harry Weller presented a report of the con- 
ference in Seattle regarding the teaching of archi- 
tectural drawing in the high schools. А discussion 
followed in which some of the architects stood in 
favor of teaching free-hand drawing and archi- 
tectural history but not architectural drawing. 

Professor Frederickson of the Lewis and Clark 
and Professor Hughes of the Rogers high schools 
were present and explained that they tried to teach 
the subject as a finding course as advocated by the 
Smith Hughes system of vocational guidance. 

Professor Smith stated that nearly every course 
in high school and college were instituted because 
of a demand of the parents or of the students. 
The Society offered to be of any assistance possi- 
ble to the schools. The teachers present expressed 
their appreciation. 


SEATTLE ARCHITECTURAL CLUB 


The Seattle Architectural Club, recently organ- 
ized, has opened an office at 3314 White Building. 
Seattle. The officers are: Harry K. Wolfe, presi- 
dent; Elso B. Di Luck, treasurer; and G. Adolph 
Engstrom, secretary. Designs for suggestive proj- 
ects have been started under the direction of Carl 
F. Gould. 


ENGINEERS HONORED 


Believing that there are many small self-liqui- 
dating public works projects which might be 
financed to provide emergency relief employment, 
the Reconstruction Finance Corporation has in- 
vited 37 engineers throughout the country to act 
in an advisory capacity on applications for loans 
for such projects. In its letters of invitation the 
Corporation says: "The applications of the smaller 
projects will very likely come through the local 
offices while the larger ones will come directly to 
us. However, we want the benefit of the re- 
actions, suggestions, and opinions of men who are 
well acquainted with such projects. In this way, we 
also hope to avoid the necessity of long trips for 
the small applicants coming to Washington simply 
for information for filing their applications." 
Western engineers to whom invitations have been 
extended include Arthur S. Bent and H. T. Cory 
of Los Angeles; John D. Galloway and Walter 
LeRoy Huber of San Francisco; D. C. Henny of 
Portland, Ore.; W. D. Shannon and Joseph Jacobs 
of Seattle, Wash.; John B. Fisken of Spokane, 
Wash.; W. D. Beers of Salt Lake City, Utah, and 
Herbert S. Crocker of Denver, Colo. 


73 


UNIQUE HOME AT CHICAGO FAIR HAS 


MODERN FEATURES 


[Perspective and Plan on Page 58] 


ШО typify the last century's advances in home 
BE \construction, a house unique in many fea- 
tures is being constructed at the Chicago World's 
Fair grounds by the Masonite Corporation. 

The four-room bungalow was designed by 
Frazier and Raftery, architects, of Chicago. Its 
modern appearance is obtained more from its un- 
usual plainness than from any ornamentation or 
striking colors. 

The exterior will be one-fourth inch Presdwood 
over a sheathing of wood fibre structural insula- 
tion. А portion of the walls will be painted white 


MODERN DESIGN AND MODERN 
MATERIALS MAKE THIS HOUSE 
OUTSTANDING IN INTEREST 


and the remainder will be varnished to retain the 
natural color of the Presdwood while tempered 
wood of a darker color, will be used for trimming. 

The flat roof, a portion of which will be closed 
in to provide a sort of covered terrace, will con- 
sist of wood sheathing applied over structural in- 
sulation for strength with a layer of one-eighth 
inch Presdwood over the sheathing and a covering 
of water-proofed canvas over this. This construc- 
tion will permit walking and the use of furniture 
on any portion of the roof, even in the hottest. 
weather, without injury to the roof. 

Interior walls will be of structural insulation 
covered with wallpaper, plaster, canvas, paint or 


ga 


decorated wood, the finish being different in each 
room. Bathroom and kitchen walls will be covered 
with Temprtile decorated in harmony with the 
room fixtures. Floors will be of Masonite cush- 
ioned flooring with the exception of the bathroom 
in which a ceramic tile will be used. 

А unique feature of the house is that the heights 
of the ceilings of the rooms vary with their size. 
For example the large living room will have a 12- 
foot ceiling, one bed room a ten-foot ceiling, and 
the second bed room and hall, nine foot. Another 
unusual feature is a baseboard around all rooms 
which conceals an electric current and makes it 
possible to plug in a lamp or other electrical equip- 
ment at any point around the room. The glass in 
all windows and exterior doors will be of a double 
construction, known as Thermo-Pane, which has a 
very high heat-insulating value. The space be- 
tween the glass is specially treated to prevent the 
collection of moisture so that even on the coldest 
days it is possible to have clear visibility. Win- 
dows will be of a jib-head design allowing the en- 
tire sash to raise up into a pocket above the open- 
ing. il 

The warm air heater, hot water heater and air 
conditioner, all being gas operated, require little 
space and will be installed under the stairway. 
The kitchen will be equipped with a gas refriger- 
ator and gas range, while the sink will have the 
most modern dish-washing equipment. In the bath- 
room there will be the most modern medicine cab- 
inet with illumination concealed back of the mirror 
in such manner as to give perfect lighting results. 


ARCHITECT AN ELECTION WINNER 


О. R. Bean of Lawrence, Holford, Allyn © 
Bean, architects of Portland, Oregon, was elected 
City Commissioner at the recent November elec- 
tion. Besides his association with one of Port- 
land's leading architectural firms, Mr. Bean has 
served on the advisory board of the Portland 
Housing Code, has been vice-president of the 
Oregon state building code committee, was three 
times president of the Oregon State Chapter, 
A.I.A., and a former chairman of the city plan- 
ning committee of the Portland City Club. 


HOUSING NEED 15 HERE 

The future of the building industry was envis- 
ioned as "greater and more prosperous than ever 
before known” by Rolland J. Hamilton, president 
of the American Radiator Company, at the ninth 
semi-annual dinner, on November 1, of the Pro- 
ducers’ Council, affiliated with the American In- 
stitute of Architects. The upward trend, Mr. 
Hamilton predicted, would start in 1933. 

A national shortage of housing space will fol- 
low "a vast unscrambling” of the situation arising 
from the doubling-up of families, he asserted. The 
present demand for lower priced city housing he 
described as tremendous. The country, according 
to Mr. Hamilton, is amply able to finance its build- 
ing needs. 

He gave President Hoover full credit for estab- 
lishing the Home Loan Bank System, which prom- 
ises to "mark the beginning of a new day in 
American home ownership." Real estate mort- 
gages, he declared, would continue to be sound 
investments. He warned the public and the indus- 
try not to be misled by "defeatists." 

"In our opinion," said Mr. Hamilton, address- 

ing representatives of the architectural societies, 
the construction industry, and other groups at the 
Architectural League, "the prospects for next year 
are definitely better than the status of 1932, espe- 
cially as regards residential work, which in terms 
of square feet of floor space awarded normally, 
represents about 55 per cent of total building con- 
struction. 
- "We believe there is an exceptionally large 
pent-up demand for this class of work destined to 
bring substantial activity over a considerable num- 
ber of years; and that 1933 will see a start of such 
activity. 

"Commercial building comes later in the cycle 
and will probably have to await its turn. The 
measure of the start predicted for next year will 
depend on the customary factors governing indus- 
trial activity—revival of confidence in general and 
investment confidence in particular. 


“The trend of the building industry is that of a 
basic need in the richest country in the world 
wherein the public are demanding better homes, 
schools, churches and public buildings; a country 
which for over one hundred years has expanded 
its wealth and production at an average annual 
rate in excess of 4 per cent and can well afford the 
bettter structures it desires. 

"Because it represents a capital investment and 
the needs of the moment may be deferred, it is 
necessary in considering this trend to think in 
building cycles rather than in terms of a given 
year. With this approach, our industry is clearly 
seen as resting on unimpaired foundations; and 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


after suffering recessations probably more severe 
percentage-wise than any major industry, it has 
the vitality and the faith to envision a future 
greater and more prosperous than ever before 
known." 

Replying to the "defeatists" who declare that 
there is no place for new building enterprise and 
question when there will be, Mr. Hamilton de- 
clared: 


“The replacement of food and clothing must be 
immediate; whereas the replacement of shelter can 
be postponed. In the midst of a period more acute 
than ever before experienced, the weak-hearted 
and non-observant fail to appreciate that the 
stream of our business is dammed and not dried 
up; that the demand is piling up but not extin- 
guished and that the longer we suffer our present 
situation the greater the force of pent-up require- 
ments. 

“The cycle of food replacement is daily; that of 
clothing is measured in months; whereas the cycle 
of building is equally inexorable but is measured 
in years. 

“The building industry is just as sound today as 
it has ever been in our history. Never has the 
public demand for new and better buildings of all 
kinds been more pronounced than at this moment. 

“The year 1925," he explained, “was the peak 
of residential construction and during that year 
in 257 cities (constituting probably less than 40 
per cent of the total population of the country) 
there were erected accommodations for 491,000 
families. 


"By a steady process this shrank until in 1931 
the like figure was 98,000 families, with an esti- 
mate for 1932 of 65.000 families. These 65.000 
family units added only 2/10 of 1 per cent to the 
existing stock of housing accommodations, and the 
cost thereof was probably less than the annual fire 
loss alone in this class of buildings. 

“In other words, there are in this country ap- 
proximately 32,500,000 family units and with a 
normal replacement factor of 21% per cent per 
annum, the average requirement without regard to 
growth of population, is between 800,000 and 
900,000 family units per annum. During this pe- 
riod there was an increase in population of prob- 
ably 11,000,000 and approximately 7,500,000 mar- 
riages. 

“The doubting Thomases assert that regardless 
of these statistics the country is full of empty 
buildings and why talk of more. Leaving aside the 
fact that it is a good thing to talk about building 
for some time before actually beginning, the im- 
plication is false. 

"The midsummer report of the National Asso- 
ciation of Real Estate Boards indicated shortages 


75 


in single family houses in 10 per cent of the cities 
surveyed, and in spite of much doubling up of 
families, a normal balance of supply and demand 
in 76 per cent of the cities. 

"Six per cent of the reporting cities had a 
shortage of apartment buildings and 66 per cent 
reported a balanced supply. This means that im- 
mediately economic betterment ensues there will 
be a vast unscrambling of the prevailing ‘doubled 
up’ situation, and a shortage of housing space for 
these families. There is little possibility of over- 
emphasis with respect to the implications of this 
statement.” 

ОЕ lower priced city housing, Mr. Hamilton 
said, no one who will take the pains really to in- 
vestigate can doubt that despite our economic 
afflictions, there is a present demand for such ас- 
commodations of really tremendous proportions— 
and at prices which yield a fair return. 

Mr. Hamilton denied that the country is not 
able financially to bear the burden implied by 
statistics of building needs. He pointed out that in 
1925, the peak year of residential building, the 
total per capita expenditure for new housing ac- 
commodations was $24, and the total per capita 
expenditure for all classes of buildings (except 
public works and utilities) was $43—this with an 
estimated national income of $741 per capita. 

“The truth is,” he asserted, “that even in this 
peak year of expenditures, the American people 
were amply able to afford the small percentage of 
their income dedicated to new construction; and 
are able to do so again. 

“Does any one question that our people can af- 
ford as much for the building of their homes as 
they can for their automobiles? Yet in 1931 the 
approximate expenditure for new automobiles was 
$1,407,000,000 and for new residential construc- 
tion was $811,390,000." 

Over a long period of time, according to Mr. 
Hamilton, real estate mortgages have proved an 
excellent investment, as shown by the large hold- 
ings thereof by the most conservative investment 
institutions. 'The losses witnessed in these ab- 
normal times, he said, are no criterion of the past 
or future. 

October 15, 1932, the day the new system of 
Federal Home Loan Banks opened for business, 
was called by Mr. Hamilton one of the most im- 
portant dates in the history of the building in- 
dustry. 

"To the President of the United States," he 
continued, "must go full credit for proposing this 
measure and for holding before the people the 
pressing public need for its enactment from the 
day the Congress met up to the last day of the 
session. 

"Once advanced, Democrats апа Republicans 


76 


alike joined in its support. The passage of that 
bill and the opening of these banks should mark 
the beginning of a new day in American home 
ownership. 

“This major addition to the nation's banking 
system is more than a device to meet the present 
emergency. lt is a permanent central core for the 
financing of home ownership. As it gets under 
way it will separate long-term borrowing for a 
home from its present entanglement with short- 
term borrowing for commerce, industry and зреси- 
lation. 

“The Home Loan Bank System greatly widens 
the market for materials and labor for the entire 
building industry since these banks make avail- 
able immediately $134,000,000 for new mortgages 
on homes and for refinancing present mortgages, 
and can draw potential capital for these purposes 
as rapidly as needed up to $1,600,000,000. 

“This means that after the Home Loan Bank 
System gets into operation, the building industry 
can expect this banking system to provide funds 
and credit to create approximately five billion dol- 
lars worth of home building and repair work dur- 
ing the next three years. 

“The far-reaching effect of this is best appre- 
ciated when it is realized that in the peak year of 
1925 we spent only one-fourth of this amount for 
single family houses. 

“This is the best assurance of the future of the 
building industry—next to agriculture the largest 
industry in the country and which in normal times 
with its total volume of seven billion dollars, pays 
in normal years, like 1926, the largest American 
wage bill amounting to more than three billion 
dollars." 


OUR MODERN ARCHITECTURE 

Modern materials and methods such as Ameri- 
can industry is developing are producing our mod- 
ern architecture, Raymond M. Hood of the New 
York Chapter of the American Institute of Archi- 
tects, said. 

“The architecture of the past," Mr. Hood con- 
tinued, "is not being discarded because it is old- 
fashioned in appearance or to 'pep' up the pro- 
fesion with a new line of goods. 

“The new architecture has burst upon us, Бе- 
cause we cannot avoid it, because modern industry 
has developed new materials, processes and meth- 
ods that make a building more convenient, more 
comfortable, better suited to its purposes. 

"And so much better are they than the mate- 
rials and methods of the past that they cannot be 
denied. They can not be incorporated in the old 
forms, so of necessity we have had to develop for 
them new forms into which they can fit—and a 
new architecture is born." 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


MONEL METAL ir xire any 


is the accepted material for soda fountains and lunch-room equipment, just as it 


is the universal metal for food service equipment in leading hotels and restau- 


rants throughout the country. 


CORROSI RON [Acid Resisting Iron] 


is the accepted material for draining waste lines. CORROSIRON meets all 
State and Municipal specifications for drain lines from school laboratories and 


chemistry rooms. 


Pacific Foundry Company Ltd. 
Pacific Metals Company Ltd. 


470 East Third St. 3100 Nineteenth St. 551 Fifth Ave. 
LOS ANGELES SAN FRANCISCO NEW YORK 


The New Plant 


of Ford Motor Company 
Seattle." Wash. 


jo 


ni 
2 


Large tonnages of 
BETHLEHEM WIDE-FLANGE 
STRUCTURAL SHAPES 
and 
PACIFIC COAST 
REINFORCING STEEL 


were used in the construction 
of this building 


PACIFIC COAST 
STEEL 


Sulbsishiary of нине à 
Bethlehem НМ Stee! Corporation 
= " 
РЕНО 5505-00 1 504 906 San Francisco 
District Offices . Seattle, Portland, Los Angeles. Honolulu 
Architects and Engineers General Contractors Export Distributor . . Bethlehem Steel Export Corporation 
Albert Kahn, Inc. Clinton Construction Co. New York 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 77 


O$Xnnouncing... 


A New Service 
for Architects, 
Contractors 


and Builders 


HROUGH the General Electric 

Kitchen Institute, а newly or 
ganized promotion department of the 
General Electric Company, we are 
now able to offer a complete planning 
service to architects, contractors, 
builders or their clients. 


This service, of course, is in no 
way competitive, but intended to co- 
operate with those building homes or 
remodeling, to assimilate their ideas 
into completely modern, efficient and 
harmonized electric kitchens. 


For kitchen remodeling, planning is 
done to permit the owner to equip 
the kitchen with electrical appliances, 
step by step, adding, as means permit, 
one after another until the plan is 
complete. 


Please call us for full information 
regarding our electric kitchen plans, 
and arrange to see our new “dream 
kitchen” on wheels at your first op- 
portunity. 


General Electric e Home Appliances 


General Electric Kitchens 


L. Н. BENNETT COMPANY, LTD. 


401 SUTTER STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 
DOuglas 6460 


Oakland - Berkeley - Sacramento - San Jose 


78 


CEMENT ASSOCIATION ANNIVERSARY 

The Portland Cement Association at its 30th 
annual meeting in Chicago last month elected 
Charles F. Conn chairman of the board of direc- 
tors. Mr. Conn is president of the Giant Portland 
Cement Company of Philadelphia. 

H. L. Block, president of the Missouri Portland 
Cement Company of St. Louis, was elected treas- 
urer of the Association and is also a director. 

The thirtieth anniversary of the Association was 
commemorated at a special dinner at which Robert 
W. Lesley, a founder of the Association and its 
first president, was a guest of honor. 

Because of its organization in 1902, the Portland 
Cement Association ranks as one of the oldest 
trade associations in the country. 

The Association was formed to consider what 
is now a minor incident in the manufacture of 
cement, the sacking problem. At the time of the 
Association's birth, the use of cement was largely 
confined to rough structures, such as dams and 
foundations. But through cooperation the cement 
manufacturers standardized principles of use so 
now cement is utilized in nearly all structures, 
either as a structural or decorative material and 
oftentimes both. 


$566,000 FOR ELEVATORS 

Thirty-seven elevators will provide for the 
transportation needs of the new United States Su- 
preme Court building in Washington, the marble 
cornerstone of which was laid recently. 

The contract for these installations, costing ap- 
proximately $566,000, let to the Otis Elevator 
Company, calls for: 31 gearless traction signal 
control passenger eelvators, travelling at 600 feet 
speed, 26 of them lifting 2,500 pounds and the 
rest 3,000, total travel 100 feet; two gearless trac- 
tion collective control passenger elevators, with 
self-levelling and capacities of 1,200 pounds at 350 
feet speed, rise 75 feet; and four geared traction, 
self-levelling, car-switch control freight elevators, 
lifting 5,000 pounds at 250 feet speed with a rise 
of 100 feet. 

Тре signal control elevators are equipped with 
Otis electric door operating devices for car and 
hatchway doors. With the collective control ele- 
vators are furnished Otis cars with doors and with 
elevator entrances; also door operating devices. 


ELEVATORS REDUCE EXPENSES 
Modernization of the elevator equipment in the 
Keenan Building, Liberty Avenue and 7th Street, 
Pittsburgh, has reduced operating costs by $250 
a month and increased the building tenancy from 
80 to 95 per cent, according to the present man- 
agement, 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


“This building was erected т 1918, and in 1927 
was taken over by the present management," 
states |. C. Knapp, vice president of the Otis Ele- 
vator Company. "According to the information 
reaching us, at that time, they were faced with 
serious competition in view of a large building 
being erected directly across the street. Conse- 
quently, they spent about $50,000 for changing 
the elevator machines to Unit Multi-Voltage Con- 
trol, increasing the speed to 650 feet per minute 
from 550 feet, installing of new first floor en- 
trances, new cabs, door closers throughout and 
new signal system. 

“Upon taking possession of the building at that 
time, it was found that it was rented to about 80 
per cent of capacity. Since the elevators were mod- 
ernized, the building has never been below 95 per 
cent occupied. This is in spite of the fact that the 
new buildings erected in Pittsburgh since 1927 
have more than doubled the rentable office floor 
space in that city. 

“The management is also obtaining the same 
rate per square foot as is being paid in newer 
buildings. They estimate a saving in operating cost 
of about $250 per month. 


KELVINATOR BOOKLET 

'The Kelvinator Corporation of Detroit, Michi- 
gan. has recently had conducted for them by 
'Trade- Ways, Inc. of New York, a national survey 
on the question of cool water and profits—from an 
economic end. 

The result published in booklet form is written 
strictly from the viewpoint of refrigeration users 
in the building field. 

The report is a real contribution to the knowl- 
edge of present day conditions. Copies of the 
booklet, which is graphically illustrated, may be 
obtained on request from the Kelvinator Corpora- 
tion, Detroit, Mich. 


MONEL METAL SINKS 
The International Nickel Company of New 
York, has published a new catalog featuring Inco 
standardized monel metal sinks and tops in stream- 


line and straitline models. This catalog ts A. I. A. 


file INo. 29-H-6. It is well illustrated and has tables 
of dimensions and weights. The Pacific Metals 
Company, Ltd., of San Francisco, are the licensees 
in the California territory. 


ARCHITECTURAL EXAMINATION 

Examinations for certificates of architecture will 
be held on January 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th at the 
Division of Architecture, University of California, 
Berkeley. Details of the examination may be 
secured at the office of the State Board of Arch- 
itectural Examiners, 450 McAllister Street, San 
Francisco. 


The Architect and Engineer, December. 1932 


THE СЕИ Е 
МАП, СНОТЕ 


TO INSURE standard, depend- 
able equipment installed prompt- 
ly at moderate cost, the Cutler 
Mail Chute should be specified 
by name. If desired, approxi- 
mate estimates will be furnished 
in advance. 


If preferred, a stated sum may 
be allowed to cover this item. 


Full information on request. 


PRICE BUILDING SPECIALTIES, 

San Francisco, California 
CONTINENTAL BUILDING SPECIALTIES, Inc. 
Los Angeles, California 

D. E. FRYER & COMPANY, С. М. BOOST, 
Seattle, Washington Portland, Oregon 
FRYER-FORD COMPANY, 
Spokane, Washington 


CUTLER MAILCHUTE СО. 


General Offices and Factory 
ROCHESTER, NEW YORK 


HAWS 


7“ UN SANITARY DRINKING 
/ FOUNTAIN 
MODEL NO. 7A 


Specified by Architect H. A. 
Minton and installed in the 
following 


San Francisco Women's College 
San Francisco 


Home of the Good Shepherd 
San Francisco 
College of Holy Names 
Oakland 


Mount Carmel School 
Redwood City 


. thereby safeguarding health 
and insuring a fixture of lasting 
quality. 


HAWS SANITARY DRINKING FOUNTAIN CO. 


1808 Harmon Street, Berkeley 


79 


80 


BUILD 
WELED — 


PROPERLY designed and well built 
building is a credit to any city and 
a worth while investment for its owner. 


Such structures are the STAND- 
ARD Оп, Воилимс, Matson 
BuirpiNG, Foun-FirTY SUT- 
TER STREET, STOCK EXCHANGE, 
S. Е. Base Barr Park, Мил 
Tower, Opera House and 
VETERANS MEMORIAL and 
other notable structures — all 


built or supervised by — 


Lindgren & Swinerton, Inc. 
Standard Oil Building 


San Francisco 


Complete 
the Circle of Protection 


LIFE INSURANCE 
plus 
LIFE INSURANCE TRUST 


Life insurance is good—a is an arrangement be- 


man should take out all 
he can afford. But don’t 
stop there. Remember— 
life insurance provides 
money—but ло! the abil- 
ity to manage it. 


The Life Insurance Trust 
fills this lack — completes 
the circle of protection, It 


tween you and the bank 
providing for ihe collec- 
tion and investment of 
your life insurance estate, 
the payment of income to 
your dependents, and the 
final disbursement of 
principal, all exactly as 
you direct. Call or write 
for details. 


TRUST DEPARTMENT 


Wells Fargo Bank 
Union Trust Co. 


Since 1852 

Two Offices: 
Market at Montgomery and 
Market at Grant Avenue 


SAN FRANCISCO 


MAY CUT CONTRACTOR'S FEES 


Glen V. Slater, Assistant Registrar of Contrac- 
ors, in a public statement to the press, says there 
is no foundation to the report that an increase in 
the contractors’ registration fee was to be sought 
by the Registrar of Contractors in the 1933 Cali- 
fornia State Legislature. 

On the contrary, he says, it is highly probable 
that a reduction in the registration fee will be 
advocated by the Registrar. 

It is quite possible that the Legislature will be 
asked to set a minimum fee of $5 and a maximum 
fee of $10, with the power to set the fee, within 
these limitations and providing circumstances war- 
rant such action, being vested in the Registrar, and 
of course subject to approval of the Governor and 
the Director of Finance. The following paragraphs 
are taken from Mr. Slater's recent resume of the 
accomplishments of the State Contractors’ Act 
during the past three years: 

“A careful review of these accomplishments con- 
clusively shows that the law has more than justi- 
fied itself and proved of real value to the public 
and the industry. At the same time the Registrar 
has been able to render a genuine service to the 
public and the industry during these times of eco- 
nomic stress in accordance with the mandate of 
Governor James Rolph Jr. 

“Unquestionably, the chief accomplishment has 
been to rid the State of hundreds of unscrupulous, 
unethical and fly-by-night contractors who, lack- 
ing in integrity, ability and financial stability, соп- 
tinue to bilk the gullible public. 

“Inasmuch as the State was enjoying one of the 
greatest building booms in its history at the time 
this measure became effective in 1929, the nefar- 
ious operations of this type of contractor were fast 
assuming the proportions of a giant state wide 
racket. 

“The measure was sponsored in the 1929 legis- 
lature by the California State Builders’ Exchange, 
the Associated General Contractors, Ltd., and 
other groups in the industry, and its enforcement 
has resulted in higher standards and ethics within 
the industry as well as restoring the confidence 
of the general public in the ability, integrity, and 
financial stability of the contractors. 

“Likewise, the operation of this law has un- 
doubtedly saved the building public millions of 
dollars. It is obvious that enforcement of this act 
prevented many contractors from performing un- 
ethical and unscrupulous acts which would have 
worked financial losses upon the public. 

“The benefits derived by the public and the 
building and construction industry from the oper- 
ation of this act cannot be shown by the amount 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


of money involved in the complaints brought be- 
fore the Registrar, which, thus far totals $614,000. 

“These complaints, in the majority of cases, in- 
volve only a small unit of some major building 
or construction project with an aggregate value 
running into millions of dollars. This is due to 
the fact that the unethical contractor may, for ex- 
ample, be awarded a half million dollar job, and 
before completion of the job he would be hailed 
before the Registrar in a dispute involving pos- 
sibly only a hundred dollars. 

“Were it not for the operation of the law in 
such cases, it is obvious that the contractor would 
be at liberty to carry the project to completion 
in an improper and faulty manner, entailing con- 
siderable financial loss to his patron or subcontrac- 
tors, which might run into a large percentage of 
the total value of the entire project. 

"We have, in our files, many records showing 
concrete examples of the foregoing, and one typi- 
cal case is No. 55. 

"In this case, the investigation revealed the fact 
that twelve houses were being financed on ficti- 
tious loans and twelve owners were paying inter- 
est on money that was not available in the first 
place, as no loans had actually been made. This 
firm was forced into bankruptcy and the officers 
sent to prison for embezzlement of funds. In this 
same case, more than $200,000.00 was involved, 
although the actual complaint filed with the Regis- 
trar reflected only a small amount and involved 
only one of the twelve houses. 


“The operation of this act has served a two- 
fold purpose, in that it has protected the public 
in cases such as I have just cited, and at the same 
time has protected the legitimate contractor and 
business man. 


"Enforcement of the Act has been instrumental 
in greatly curtailing the continued practices of 
many so-called fly-by-night operators in going 
from town to town and underbidding reputable 
contractors with the intention of skinning the job 
by substituting cheap and inferior materials, di- 
verting funds received for payment of labor or 
materials, and vanishing after receiving one or 
more payments, leaving the owner with a partially 
completed project saddled with liens for materials 
for which he had presumably paid. 

"Economic conditions during the past three 
years have resulted in a heavy turnover in the 
number of registered contractors operating in 
California. Since enactment of the Contractors' 
Registration Act оп August 14, 1929, a total of 
39,235 individuals, copartnerships, corporations or 
associations have been engaged in the contracting 
business at one time or another. 

"Of this number, 19,248 or 49.1% are now 


The Architect and Engineer, Decembcr, 1932 


FOR BETTER 
SURFACING 


BAY STATE BRICK 
AND CEMENT COATING 


Element resisting . . . 
rich flat finish . . . en- 
.. and 


during beauty . 


satisfactory service. 


CALIFORNIA SALES CO., 


Distributors 


INC. 


San Francisco 
7 Front Street 
SUtter 8854 


ТНЕ ВАУ STATER 


Ж 


Building Contractors 
and Managers of 
Construction 
CLAUS 
SPRECKELS BUILDING 
San Francisco 
Telephone 
GA RFIELD 7742 


Christmas 


ai 
„? 
Nem Year's 
Greetings 
фа 


Architect and Lugineer 


Readers, Advertisers 


and Friends 


i 
| 
\ 
| 
| 
ў 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
ў 
| 
| 
ШЕ 


HEATING * COOKING 
WATER HEATING е REFRIGERATION 


Quick Clean Economical 


the modern fuel 


Satisfies owners... 


... pleases tenants 


82 


(SRE EIS eI 


operating and in good standing. In contrast, 
19,987 contractors, or 50.9%, have been licensed 
and engaged in the building or construction busi- 
ness at some time or other during the past three 
years, but for various reasons have gone out of 
business. This situation is due to economic con- 
ditions as well as the raising of qualifications and 
standards within the industry. 

“At the same time it is noteworthy that an aver- 
age of 18,500 contractors have remained operat- 
ing and in good standing continuously during the 
licensing period." 


SOME KIND OF A RECORD 

Those who are making money moving dirt these 
days have to move it fast. The Frederickson & 
Watson Construction Company of Oakland, 
Calif., believe that, considering the size and weight 
of the machine used, they have established an out- 
put record for a dragline in sandy dirt. 

The contract was the state highway job, U. S. 
Route 101, south of Santa Maria. In the early 
stages of the work the soft-going prevented the 
use of trucks so crawler wagons were installed. 
The dragline had a 40-ft. boom and a 2-yd. bucket. 

The California division of highways states as 
follows: 

The hauls were from 300 to 1500 ft. 141,500 
cu. yds. (bank measure) were moved іп 7314 
shifts between Jan. 22, 1932, and Mar. 8, 1932. 

“The maximum daily output for an 8-hour shift 
was 3200 cu. yds. The maximum hourly output 
was 480 cu. yds. The average output for the job 
was 1931 cu. yds. per 8 hours. All quantities are 
bank measure and not truck count.” 

Here is something for dirt movers to shoot at.— 
Roads and Streets. 


FEDERAL BUILDINGS 

The following Federal buildings for the Pa- 
cific Northwest have been definitely authorized: 

Washington: Spokane, $790,000; Bremerton, 
$135,000; Centralia, $110,000; Montesano, $85,- 
000; Shelton, $80,000. Oregon: Hillsboro, $80,000; 
Hood River, $90,000. Idaho: Blackfoot, $125,000. 
Eastport, $59,000, each minus the ten per cent 
required under the Economy Bill. Montana: Dill- 
on,, $100,000; Glendive, $95,000. 


"COLD MAGIC" 

The York lce Machinery Corporation of York, 
Pennsylvania, has recently issued an exception- 
ally fine brochure on refrigeration machinery en- 
titled, "Cold Magic". It tells the story of refrig- 
eration during the last fifty years, it's relation to 
every day life and it's value to commerce and in- 
dustry. This book is profusely illustrated with 
photographs showing many of the details of ice 
machinery manufacture. 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


CONTRACTOR LICENSING 

Following on the heels of the adoption of a con- 
tractors' licensing plan in California and a move- 
ment for a law in New York during the past win- 
ter, agitation is now being carried on for such a 
plan in Ohio. As in the other cases, the project 
would include heating contractors in its scope. 
The comment we receive is to the effect that the 
proposal is not likely to make much headway in 
Ohio this year. 

This whole movement looking toward some kind 
of licensing plan is of vital interest to all present 
and prospective contractors. Its adherents look 
on the idea as the salvation of contracting, while 
those opposed point to alleged failures of other 
like plans. Just now these proposals are all in the 
discussion stage except in California. 

One general principle may well guide the think- 
ing of any contractor who must make up his mind 
whether or not to support such moves. It is, that 
the success of licensing laws has depended almost 
altogether on the character of the agency set up 
to enforce them. No matter how well the law 
itself may be drawn, or how promising the plan, 
unless the actual administration is free of politics 
—even group or industry politics—it will not suc- 
ceed for long. Before supporting such proposals, 
make sure that their administration will be in com- 
petent hands. Where this is true we believe that 
licensing plans will work to advantage. —Heating 
and Ventilating Magazine. 


MODERN DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

The new Manhattan sanitary drinking foun- 
tain, manufactured by the Haws Sanitary Drink- 
ing Faucet Company of Berkeley, is favored by 
architects who approve of the modern angular 
motif. The vertical lines of the fixture reflect 
present day tendencies in architecture. 

The Manhattan was designed primarily to ac- 
commodate the enduring qualities of Haws foun- 
tains to the needs of modern architecture. The 
pleasing proportions of the vitreous china bowl 
are based upon the recognized rhythms of mod- 
ern art. The colors from which to choose cover 
the entire range of color harmony. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Early Christian Architecture, Brooks. 

History of Architecture, Fletcher. 

Architectural Styles, Rosengarten. 

A Short History of Architecture, Sturgis. 

Color Decoration of Architecture. Ward. 

Modern Plasterer, Verrall. 

Medieval Architecture, Its Origin and Develop- 
ment, Porter. 

History of Ornament, Speltz. 

How to Study Architecture, Coffin. 


The Architect and Engincer, Dccember, 1932 


G:H: BROWN 


1044-1058 Forty-seventh Avenue 
OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 
Telephone: FR uitvale 8305-8306 


Product of 


CALIFORNIA SHADE CLOTH СО. 


1710 San Bruno Avenue, San Francisco 
Manufacturers of 


QUALITY HAND MADE SHADE CLOTH 
IN ALL GRADES 


Wholesale Distributors 


SLOANE-BLABON LINOLEUM 


Pump Governors 
Safety Pump Governors 
Automatic Gaa Regulat- 
ing Valves Little Giant Improved 
Gas Burnera Oil Burners 
ҮШ; САҚ Gas Burning Equipment il Pumping Sets 
Vacuum Pump Governors Oil Valves 
Vacuum Regulating Oil Strainera 


Oil Heaters 
Relief Valvea 
Oil-Burner Governors 


Valves { i 
Continous Flow Steam СН 
тара = 
Зыр Thermoatata Rotary Oil Pumps 


Reducing Valves Boiler Feed Pumps 


quar, so Boiler Feed-Water Water Heaters 
Regulators Oil Metera 


VAUGHN -G. E. WITT CO., Engineers 


C. W. VAUGHN, President and Manager 
MANUFACTURERS AND DISTRIBUTORS 


4224-28 Hollia St. Phone OL ymple 6084 
Emeryville, Oakland, Calif. 


CABOT'S CLEAR WATERPROOFINGS 


Clear Cement Waterproofing does not discolor even 
the lightest cast stone, cement or natural stone. 


Clear Brick Waterproofing is а preventativc of un- 


sightly efflorescence. 


On the San Francisco College for Women, HENRY 
A. Minton, architect, the cast sione, both plain 
and ornamental, is treated with Cabot's Clear 
Cement Waterproofing. 


GUNN, CARLE & CO. 


20 Potrero Ave. San Francisco UNderhill 5486 


83 


The new Decatur 
De Luxe Lavatory, 
illustrated here, is 
representative of 
the MUELLER 
line of quality vit- 
reous china. 


MUELLER СО. 
Decatur, Ill. 


San Francisco Branch: 
1072-76 Howard St. 


The Modern Way— 
BUILD WITH STEEL 


Protect your Investment from 
Fire and Quake 
Structural Steel for Buildings 
and Bridges 


JUDSON-PACIFIC CO. 


609 MISSION STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 
DOuglas 4460 


Plants, San Francisco and Oakland 


MARBLE CLASS 


А new decorative building material of 

exceptional beauty—looks like genuine 

marble with its innumerable delicate 
veins and royal colors. 


For New and Remodeled Build- 
ings, Store Fronts, Hotel Lobbies, 1 


Office Buildings, Vestibules, Etc. 


MaeGRUER & COMPANY 


266 Tehama Street San Francisco 


W.8 J. SLOANE 


Established 1843 


RUGS CARPETS 
LINOLEUMS 
WINDOW SHADES 
Phone: GArfield 2827 
FURNITURE 


DRAPERIES 
Estimates Gladly Submitted 


216-228 SUTTER STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 


84 


THE ‘JORDANS’ EMPLOY AN ARCHITEC] 
The “Jordans” have decided to employ an 

architect, and only two or three million westerners 

already know about their momentous decision. 

You see the "Jordans," consisting of Don and 
Mary Jordan, weekly broadcast their activities 
over the entire western National Broadcasting 
Company's network in behalf of the building in- 
dustry in general and The Paraffine Companies, 
[nc., products, in particular. 

During the past several months the "Jordans" 
have been improving their present residence, which 
at the outset consisted of a completely run-down 
house, which was being barely held together with 
a few half pulled out nails. 

After the “Jordans” decided to thoroughly mod- 
ernize this house to make it livable, they enlisted 
the aid of the local Pabco man and converted it 
at an infinitesimal cost into such a livable home 
that some friend of theirs fell in love with it and 
insisted upon purchasng it, paying a price that 
enables the “Jordans” to now build the home of 
their dreams. 

Mr. and Mrs. Jordan have decided that it would 
be money well invested to employ an architect 
even in advance of the purchase of the site of their 
new home. The architect commends them for their 
foresight, telling them how important it is to se- 
lect a site possessing the proper area and eleva- 
tion that will enable them to construct their dream 
home just as they have conceived it and as his 
plans have developed it. 

Hence the many services of an architect will be 
visualized in action to an immense western audi- 
ence in a manner that will emphasize to home 
owners the importance of this profession. You will 
find it quite interesting to tune into this program 
some time. It is broadcast every Thursday morn- 
ing at 10:40 a. m., Pacific Standard Time, over 
stations KGO San Francisco, KFI Los Angeles, 
KFSD San Diego, KGW Portland, KOMO Seat- 
tle, KHQ Spokane. 

The broadcast is said to already possess one of 
the largest audiences of any western daytime pro- 
gram, being greatly enhanced by the ability of the 
"Jordans" to frequently burst into appropriate 
songs that express their momentary moods. 


GET YOUR HOUSE IN ORDER 

The beginning of a new era in building activity 
is seen by William O. Ludlow, chairman of the 
Committee on Industrial Relations of the Ameri- 
can Institute of Architects. It is high time, he 
says, for property owners to make repairs and 
keep their buildings from falling into such a ruin- 
ous state of depreciation that repairs will no lon- 
ger be possible. 

“We have now arrived at just about the bottom 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


of possible depreciation and disrepair,” declares 
Mr. Ludlow. “There is hardly a house or business 
building that does not need either a new roof, 
protective painting, plaster patching, plumbing 
and heating repairs, or something to keep it from 
a condition where repairs will no longer be prac- 
ticable. It is surely the first duty of every house- 
holder, after providing food and clothing for his 
family, to put his property in order. 

"Nor need this be done from purely selfish 
interest. There are thousands of building me- 
chanics now without jobs who must be helped 
through the coming winter either by public gifts 
or public support. If such men can be provided 
with even two or three days of work a week they 
can get along, and if every property owner does 
his duty as required by his own property and 
starts this fall to put it into proper shape there 
will be no want, at least in the great army of men 
in the building industry. 

"Right now labor and business materials are 
unusually cheap. Repairs and remodeling that 
used to cost $1,000 can be done for about $650. 
This is a good time to build, as well as repair, for 
every dollar spent in building gives the safest 
investment that can be made. Because of present 
low prices it is certain that every dollar so in- 
vested will be worth a dollar and a half in a year 
or two. 

"'The nation's recovery to financial health de- 
pends on the attitude of every man toward buying. 
No one gets a new job until someone does some 
new buying. According to all reports we have 
made a good start. The building trades, always 
one of the last industries to come back, are show- 
ing signs of life. This is the time for property 
owners to buy repairs." 


VITEX FLUES 
Plant Rubber & Asbestos Works of San Fran- 


cisco announces Vitex, the perfect gas vent or 
non-combustible hot air flue, guaranteed by that 
firm to give super satisfaction for a period equal 
to the life of a building and warranted against 
imperfections in workmanship or material. 

The producers indicate that the vitrifying pro- 
cess by which Vitex is manufactured makes it 
highly resistant to heat, acid and water. They also 
state it is unaffected by outside weather condi- 
tions and is absolutely non-corrosive, tending to 
minimize rather than resist condensation. Accord- 
ing to reports, this new product can be erected 
with perfect safety in concealed spaces, for, al- 
though its wall thickness is only approximately 
one-fourth of an inch, its high insulating qualities 
minimize radiation. 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


ARCHITECTS, We Specialize in 


SOUND CONTROL 


and 
Insulation Materials 


E. K. WOOD LUMBER CO. 
Lumber and Millwork 


SAN FRANCISCO - OAKLAND - LOS ANGELES 


Recent Contracts Completed— 


FORD ASSEMBLY PLANTS AT 
SEATTLE, LONG BEACH 
AND RICHMOND 


Clinton Construction Company 
of California 


Builders and Managers 


of Construction 


923 FOLSOM STREET SAN FRANCISCO 
Telephone SUtter 3440 


WALKER - WILKESON 
SANDSTONE 


Sawed Stone 
Building Stone Rip Rap 


The Nation's Finest Stone 
HOYT M. LESHER 
California Representative 


503 Market St., San Francisco 
Telephone: DOuglas 6436 


Walker Cut Stone 
Plant: Tacoma, Wash. 


Quarries at 


Wilkeson, Wash. 


KAWNEER 
MODERNISTIC CONSTRUCTION 
FOR 
Topay’s STORE FRONT 


Through years of experience Kawneer 
craftsmen have acquired the art of ren- 
dering in metal distinctive and efficient 
store fronts of any size or design. 


KAWNEER MFG. CO. 


BERKELEY CALIFORNIA 


85 


Gladding Bros. 
Mfg. Со. 


BURNED CLAY PRODUCTS 
ROOF TILE 
COMMON AND FACE BRICK 
FLOOR TILE 
VITRIFIED SEWER PIPE 


DRAIN TILE 
CHIMNEY PIPE 
FLUE LINING 
PLANT AND OFFICE: 


THIRD AND KEYES STREETS 
Ballard 7570 San Jose, Calif. 


<>. 
ЎЎ 


bd 


BOILERS 
for 
Every Purpose 


637 Minna Sireet, San Francisco, Calif. 
Phone: MArket 3612 


AMERICAN 


MARBLE 
COMPANY 


Office and Factory 
Swift Ave. and Canal 
P. O. Box 578 
South San Francisco, Calif. 


SUtler 2840 South San Francisco 161 


JOSEPH MUSTO 
SONS-KEENAN 
COMPANY 


MARBLE 


and 


ONYX 


535 NORTH POINT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


1801 S. SOTO STREET 
LOS ANGELES 


86 


WAYS TO PROSPERITY 


(From “Plan-It.” Bulletin of the Portland, 
Ore., City Planning Commission.) 


It is becoming increasingly evi- 
dent that prosperity exists in this 
country only when construction 
work is in progress on a large 
scale. At present private construc- 
tion for commercial and industrial 
purposes is at a low ebb, largely 
because there is little need of new 
plants. The country generally is 
pretty well over-built in most lines. 
If work, then, is to start оп a suf- 
ficient scale to bring on prosperity, 
it seems evident that public agen- 
cies must be called upon to start 
it. Two obstacles stand in the way 
of this necessary increase in pub- 
lic work. 

The first obstacle is our objec- 
tion to "unproductive" expendi- 
ture. 

It is our habit to distinguish be- 
tween those public services which 
pay their way and those who are 
a drain on the treasury. À munici- 
pal water system may show a 
profit, while a park system shows 
only expenses. Although the dis- 
tinction is merely a matter of book- 
keeping, since the citizens pay for 
both, it creates the illusion that the 
free services are useless luxuries. 
This is a holdover from pioneer 
days, when a rapid increase of in- 
dustrial equipment was the chief 
need of the country. In those days 
money spent for pleasure was a 
loss to the growth of the nation. 

At present, however, our indus- 
try is over-developed, and it is not 
productive capacity we lack, but 
markets. It is no longer proper 
then, to speak of a park system as 
‘unproductive.’ The effect on land 
values which follows the establish- 
ment of parks, churches, libraries, 
etc., is an indication that the word 
‘unproductive’ is a misnomer. Such 
institutions produce cultural values, 
and, speaking purely from the 
economic point of view, the cul- 
tural values of the community are 
the foundation of business. The 
absolute necessities of food and 
shelter are a very small fraction 
of American industry. Business de- 


GUILFO Y 
Cornice Works 


General Sheet Metal 
Work 
Skylights 


Fire Doors 


GUILFOY CORNICE WORKS 
1234 Howard Street 
San Francisco 
Phone: MArket 0561 


CHAS. STOCKHOLM 
& SONS 


Contractors 


Russ Building, San Francisco 


Phone DO uglas 4420 


Del Monte 
WHITE SAND 
Fan Shell — Beach 


WASHED IN FRESH WATER 
DRIED BY STEAM 
CLEAN BONE DRY 


esa 
Del Monte Properties Company 


Phone GArfield 4533 


401 Crocker Building San Francisco 


Specify 


DICKEY 


CLAY 
PRODUCTS 


Dickey Mastertile Face Brick 


Partition Tile Fire Brick 
Drain Tile Paving Brick 
Fireproofing Tile Wall Coping 
Floor Tile Flue Lining 


Common Brick Dickey Flashing Blocks 


W. S. DICKEY CLAY MFG. 


COMPANY 
SAN FRANCISCO 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


McClintic-Marshall 
Corporation 


= 
LM 
и} и 


STEEL BRIDGES 
and BUILDINGS 


215 WEST SIXTH STREET 
LOS ANGELES 


Subsidiary of 
Bethlehem 


Steel 


Corporation 


2050 BRYANT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


S M ITH 
Lumber Company 


OF OAKLAND 


Lumber and Mill Work 


19TH AVE. AND ESTUARY 
Oakland, California 
FRuitvale 3174 


ARMCO 


Special Analysis 
Iron and Steel 
Sheets and Plates 
For Building Construction 


ө 
THE AMERICAN ROLLING MILL CO. 
540 Tenth Street, San Francisco 
Phone: MArket 3495 
32 W. Connecticut Street, Seattle 
РР) Specify Armco Sheets and 
ам Plates for all purposes 
where durable, finely- 
finished construction is 
required. 


TRANSIT-MIX 
CONCRETE 


A Perfect-Blend 
Material 


Golden Gate Atlas 


Materials Co. 


Sixteenth and Harrison Streeta 
San Francisco 
Phone HEmlock 7020 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


pends on a high standard of liv- 
ing; beauty is of fundamental eco- 
nomic importance. 

Not only is it true that a park 
is productive if it produces health 
and pleasure for the citizens and 
increased land values for taxpay- 
ers. It needs also to be realized 
that a factory is non-productive if 
it produces only bankruptcy for its 
owner and unemployment for its 
workers, throwing them upon the 
taxpayers for support. It is there- 
fore not only justifiable to spend 
large sums on parks and museums; 
it is especially desirable to draw 
money away from investment in 
new enterprises that will produce 
unemployment. As nearly every 
industry in the country is now 
over-equipped, it is obvious that 
almost any new factory or mine 
serves no other purpose than to 
add to overhead and bring on de- 
pression. 

Construction we must have, but 
more competition we must avoid. 
It follows that “what the country 
needs is the construction of plants 
to produce cultural advance, but 
not to produce goods for sale. That 
sort of construction is public and 
semi-public; the more of it, the 
more prosperous we shall be. The 
other kind of construction is the 
overbuilding of industrial and com- 
mercial plant; the less we have of 
that, the longer our prosperity will 
last.” 

A time of stagnation in building 
can not last forever. Some of these 
fine days we are going to ‘snap 
out of it’ for no reason readily ap- 
parent, just as we fell into it for 
reasons that we still disagree over. 
As Walter Lipman well says, "In 
every depression there comes a 
time when the way to resume is 
to resume.” When we do decide 
to start our mills and factories, to 
engage again in that most desirable 
activity of building things, perhaps 
we shall decide to use some new 
and original plans for construc- 
tion. 

Since 1900 the developments in 
machinery and materials have been 
so rapid that more progress in 


YOUNG 
& 
HORSTMEYER 


GENERAL 


CONTRACTORS 


461 Market Street 


San Francisco 


Phone SUtter 6257—58 


Paul B. Young A. L. Horstmeyer 


RAY COOK 
MARBLE СО. 


IMPORTED AND DOMESTIC 
MARBLES 


For Building Construction 


Factory and Office: 
FOOT OF POWELL 8Т., OAKLAND 
Phone Pledmont 1009 


MERCURY PRESS 
We Print 
The ARCHITECT and 
ENGINEER 


“A Thing of Beauty 
Is a Joy Forever” 


942 HOWARD STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


Grinnell Automatic 
SPRINKLER 


GRINNELL COMPANY 
OF THE PACIFIC 
ENGINEERS AND 
CONTRACTORS 


VALVES, PIPE and FITTINGS 
CHEMICAL FIRE EXTINGUISHERS 
and FIRE ENGINES 


Fifth and Brannan Streets 
San Francisco 


| 


Phone DOuglas 1120-1121 


Larsen and Larsen 


General Contractors 


{v 


629 BRYANT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


FORDERER 
CORNICE WORKS 


Copper Roofs 
Galvanized Iron Work 
Elevator Doors 


269 Potrero Avenue, San Francisco 
Phone HEmlock 4100 


Robert W. Hunt Company 
ENGINEERS 
Inspection - Tests - Consultation 


Inspection and Tests of Structural 
Stcel, Reinforcing Steel 
and Cement. 


Ней Inspection and Supervision 
of Consruction of Steel and 
Concrete Structures, 
Cement, Concrete, Chemical, Met- 
allurgical, X-Ray and Physical 
Laboratorics. 


Chicago - New York - Pittsburgh 
All Large Cities 
San Francisco, 251 Kearny Street 


Chicago 


HOSPITAL 


SILENT CALL 
SIGNAL SYSTEMS 


GARNETT YOUNG AND CO. 
Pacific Coast Sales Engineers 
390 FOURTH ST. SAN FRANCISCO 


Los Angeles 


Seattle Portland 


88 


ability to build and in reasons for 
building has been made in three 
decades, than in the several cen- 
turies prior to that date. Yet the 
actual shape, the plan of buildings, 
has changed but little, if at all. The 
building or the street fitting the 
horse or even the street car, is by 
no means the best that could be 
devised for the use of the auto- 
mobile. 

Just now there is a universal at- 
tempt to cut down expenditures 
whether it be for constructive pur- 
poses or for useless ornamenta- 
tion or advertisement. All expendi- 
tures are subject to the same de- 
mand: cut down, cut off. But some 
time a better balanced attitude will 
return. Before long it will be gen- 
erally recognized that America's 
prosperity is the wise use of our 
natural resources, the changing of 
timber into lumber and houses, the 
changing of coal and water into 
power, the changing of grass into 
beef and hides, the changing of 
ore into steel and cement, the 
changing of hidden pools of oil 
into billions of miles of travel. 

Real waste is the stoppoge of 
these currents of work and ac- 
tivity. When six or seven million 
men are idle for a year, the result- 
ing economic wastes and losses are 
appalling. When a way is finally 
found to set these builders to work 
it is logical to expect that some 
radical departures from past plans 
will be made. For the past 150 
years we have been everlastingly 
busy building roads, railroads, 
canals, factories, farms and mines, 
to feed, clothe, shelter and move 
a constantly growing population. 
Now that we have reached a some- 
what stable condition of population 
we must go on with more perma- 
nent, more satisfying, more beau- 
tiful buildings." 


ELECTRIC HEATING 


Prof. Leonard Hill, the English 
scientist who for some years past 
has been carrying out important 
experiments in domestic heating 
and ventilating, has announced 


ВЕС. Ц. $. PAT. OFF. 


“More than а 


building paper" 


v 


THE SISALKRAFT CO. 
205 West Wacker Drive 
(Canal Station) Chicago, Ill. 


55 New Montgomery Street 
San Francisco, Calif. 


CRANE 


High Class Plumbing 
Fixtures 


ww 


ALL PRINCIPAL Coast CITIES 


THE TORMEY 
COMPANY 


GENERAL PAINTERS 
AND DECORATORS 


Phone WA Inut 3639 


563 FULTON STREET 


San Francisco 


W. Н. PICARD, Inc. 


PLUMBING, HEATING, 
VENTILATING and 
POWER PLANTS 


5656 College Avenue 
5662 Keith Avenue 


Oakland California 
Phones Pl edmont 9004-9005 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


OCEAN SHORE 
IRON WORKS 


550-558 EIGHTH STREET 


MA rket 0462-0463 


San Francisco California 


SP 
STEAM BOILERS 
STEEL TANKS 


SMOKE STACKS 
e WATER e 
е HEATERS • 


LUXOR 


WINDOW SHADES 


Translucent Shading 
of highest count 
cambric 


William Volker & Co. 
631 Howard Street 
San Francisco 


CLERVI 
MARBLE CO. 


MANUFACTURING CONTRACTORS 


Foreign and Domestic 
Marbles 


Inrerior & Exterior Buildings 


Office & Mill, 1721 San Bruno Ave. 


Phone MI ssion 6625 
SAN FRANCISCU, CAL. 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


that he recently made the curious 
discovery that the prickly sort of 
heat felt on facing an electric 
heater is "notably relieved on 
bringing close to the face an in- 
candescent lamp screened by a 
sheet of glass. The one set of rays 
acting on the skin antagonizes the 
other set." The effect, however, 
does not result if a sheet of gela- 
tine or cellophane is substituted 
for the glass screen. The lamp and 
the screen in front of it are, of 
course, so placed as not to shade 
the heater. Professor Hill also 
finds that the rays from an electric 
heater or dark source of heat cause 
congestion of the nose and feeling 
of stuffiness as a result of acting 
on the skin reflexly. This is not 
the case with everybody, but those 
who have a deflected septum and 
some nasal obstruction are particu- 
larly susceptible to this congestion. 
Those with widely-opened noses 
may be made sensitive by means 
of a screw nose-clip adjusted so 
as partially to obstruct their noses. 
The rays from an incandescent 
lamp also counteract these “nose- 
closing” rays, and in this case the 
counteracting rays may act on a 
part of the skin other than that 
irradiated by the electric fire. A 
square inch of skin suffices to ob- 
tain the reflex on the nose, and the 
sources of the rays may be put 
many feet away. The sensitivity of 
certain people to these rays is very 
great. 


“Cooling the face prevents the 
nose-closing effect,” Professor Hill 
continues, “hence the importance 
of ventilating rooms with cool air. 
The skin when wet with perspira- 
tion is protected from the ‘nose- 
closing’ rays, and it is noteworthy 
that a screen of invisible vapor 
rising from a bowl of water set in 
front of an electric fire or dark 
source of heat has the same pro- 
tective influence. As the bowl, to 
be effective, must be placed be- 
tween the source of heat and the 
skin, its influence is not due to a 
general humidification of the air 
of the room. It is remarkable that 


t EZ RINK 
E есі N 
Se 


D SS Nem SS zi № 


i 


NN 
3 


М К ї 
S CHIN 
i Dd clo "we 
2 O COMPLETE INSTALLATIONS | 
| STORE BANK. RESTAURANT - OFFICE: 


\ ҒІКТИВЕЗ 


- SECTIONAL’ PARTITIONS | 41 i$ 
Telephone KEarny 1533 А 

|, 852 BRANNAN Өт, ВАМ ү ЖЕ 
Муму 


ее. 


е САС ЛО" 


рле 


BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 


Recent Contracts Completed 
Y. W. C. A. Building 


San Francisco 
Library Building 
Berkeley 
Post Office Building 
Oakland 
City Hospital 
Palo Alto 


Home of the Blind 
Berkeley 


K. E. PARKER CO., INC. 
135 South Park San Francisco 
Phone КЕ arny 6640 


Phone GArfield 1164 


Hunter & Hudson 


Consulting Engineers 


DESIGNERS OF HEATING 
AIR CONDITIONING 
VENTILATING AND WIRING 
SYSTEMS, MECHANICAL 
AND ELECTRICAL EQUIP- 
MENT OF BUILDINGS 
ero 
41 SUTTER STREET 


ROOM 710 


San Francisco California 


S. RASORI 


General Contractor for 
St. Anne’s Church, 


San Francisco 


v 


74 New Montgomery Street 
San Francisco 


Phone KEarny 3537 


89 


90 


McNEAR BRICK 


FOR 


Beauty and 
Permanence 
Cw 
McNear Brick Company 
Main Office and Factories 


McNEAR POINT 
San Rafael, Calif. 


San Francisco Office and Yard 


417 BERRY STREET 


Architectural 
Metals 
Mouldings <> Grilles 


Tubing --- Ornaments 
of wee 
Steel --- Bronze 


Aluminum 


BRAUN-STEEPLE CO.,LTD. 
636 Potrero Avenue 
San Francisco 


1203 E. 8th Street 
Los Angeles 


APEX 


A ELECTRICv«« 


HEATERS 


It costs less to 
install an APEX 
Electric heater 
in the bathroom 
than to install a 
hot air duct or 
radiator. Heat is 
available twenty- 
four hours per 
day and it quali- 
fies for the low 
heating rate. 


Send for Architects’ Catalogue 


Bathroom Heaters in the Standard 


Colors, 1000 to 2500 Watts 
$12.50 to $35.00 


APEX MANUFACTURING CO. 
1501 Powell Street 
Emeryville, Oakland, Calif. 


Distributors 


Sandoval Sales Со. 
Phone KE arny 7010 
557 Market Sireet 
San Francisco, Calif. 


Apex Sales Co. 
Phone MU tual 9141 
1855 Industrial Street 

Los Angeles, Calif. 


a dense cloud of steam, or a layer 
of water, does not protect the skin 
from the ‘nose-closing’ rays. The 
llford screen used for the wonder- 
ful new infra-red photographs 
transmits infra-red rays which are 
not scattered by the mist in the 
atmosphere. This screen permits 
the ‘nose-closing’ rays to pass and 
cuts out the 'nose-opening ones; 
so also do screens of cellophane 
and horn. Glass, on the other 
hand, absorbs most of the ‘nose- 
closing’ rays and lets the ‘nose- 
opening’ ones through. Spectro- 
scopic study of the screens shows 
that the ‘nose-opening’ rays belong 
to a group about 20,000 to 30,000 
Augustrom units in the region of 
the shorter infra-red rays. 

“Sources of heat like the open 
fire or modern gas heater are 
pleasant because they give off 
these beneficent rays in sufficient 
quantity. Electric heaters can be 
made as pleasant by putting more 
current through the wire and so 
making them bright instead of dull 
red. The use of the bowl of water 
in front of stoves can be shown, 
and the need for ventilation of all 
rooms with соо} air made evident 
by very simple experiments. — 
А. C. Blackall, London. 

STUDY BUILDING NEEDS 

NOW 

Studies enabling states and 
cities to formulate projects for 
low rent housing and slum clear- 
ance with the aid of loans from 
the Reconstruction Finance Cor- 
poration should be started at once 
throughout the country, Abram 
Garfield, president of the Cleve- 
land Chapter of the American In- 
stitute of Architects, declares in a 
statement issued by the Institute. 

These studies should not be de- 
layed until State Legislatures es- 
tablish the regulatory machinery 
required by the self-liquidating 
provisions of the Emergency Re- 
lief and Construction Act, urges 
Mr. Garfield, one of the leaders in 
the movement to improve housing 
conditions among the masses as a 
governmentally recognized "public 
purpose." 


MULLEN MFG. 
COMPANY 


BANK, STORE AND OFFICE 

FIXTURES—CABINET WORK 

OF GUARANTEED QUALITY 
CHURCH SEATING 


Office and Factory: 
64 RAUSCH ST., Bet. 7th and 8th Sis. 
San Francisco 
Telephone HE mlock 2858 


G. P. W. Jensen & Son 


Building Construction 


320 Market Street, San Francisco 
Phone 2444 


GENERAL 
ROOFING CO. 


HARRY HENNINGS 


Office and Warehouse: 
BEACH AND HALLECK STS. 
OAKLAND, CALIF. 


Member Builders Exchange 
Telephone OLympic 5208 


WEDGE NOTCH COLUMN CLAMPS 


FOR 
Rapidity, Economy 
and Efficiency 


USE 


STEELFORMS 


FOR 
Concrete Construction 


STEELFORM 
CONTRACTING CO. 


SAN FRANCISCO 
PORTLAND 


DOVETAIL ANCHOR SLOT 


Los ANGELES 
SEATTLE 


Л 
a 
E 
[e] 
re 
ш 
< 
o 
[7] 
к 
ш 
а 
27 
D 
= 
ш 
ET 
- 
Е 
2 


STEEL,'CONSTRUCTION TOWERS 


The Architect and Engineer, December. 1932 


SUNSET 
LUMBER COMPANY 


Begistered Architectural 
Woodwork 


= 


Pine and Redwood 
Lumber 
= 


400 High Street, Oakland 
Phone ANdover 1000 


What architects and all who build have 
4 learned to expect from Quandt craftsmen: 


“Co-operation for Quality” 
Materials applied efficiently and expeditiously 
by beush or spray application to achieve the 

Э. best result at the minimum cost to the owner, W 


Қ A. Quandt & Sons 


Painters and Decorators 
Since 1885 
374 GUERRERO STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 
Telephone MArket 1711 
own 
Quandt-quality is available for the small job 
as well as the large. Pioneers and Special- 
ists in the application of Lacquer іт the 
architectural field. Complete decorative 
color schemes designed and furnished. 
E Advice for technical painting requirements 
furnished. Our operations are state-wide, 


м 


2.2) 


Xen SCC 


BATES-CARPENTER 
COMPANY 


Distributors of 
Building Specialties 


Atsco Roller Screens 
Atsco Tubular Metal Screens 
Fereous and Non Fereous Metal 


Medicine Cases—Wood and Steel 
lroning Boards—Wood and S:eel 


Shower Doors—Bronze and Aluminum 


Ariston Steel Windows 


Estimates Furnished without Obligation 
557 MARKET STREET 
San Francisco, Calif. SUtter 5323 


Pine and Redwood 


Lumber 
Creo-Dipt Stained Shingles 


А. J. Russell, Mgr. 


16 California St. 
San Francisco, 


The Architect and Engineer, December, 1932 


"No one thing has given а 
greater impetus to the idea of re- 
placing bad housing with better 
housing than this act of the gov- 
ernment,” he says. “It has called 
attention forcibly to conditions 
which were almost universal but 
were known to very few. Ш has 
set before us the acknowledgment 
by Congress that slum clearance 
is a public purpose and it holds 
out an opportunity to borrow 
money at a time when it cannot 
be borrowed from апу other 
source. 

"Following this act of Congress, 
states have examined their consti- 
tutions and laws and have been 
surprised to find that they are not 
prepared to take advantage of this 
principle that has been acknowl- 
edged by the Federal Government. 

“New York State alone had 
prepared itself and has a housing 
act giving certain privileges and 
exercising the control that the 
State should require when grant- 
ing privileges. Ohio has followed 
with an act enabling the State to 
exercise control and granting one 
important privilege, that of con- 
demnation. Other states may fol- 
low this lead when their legisla- 
tures meet and the privileges 
granted will vary but the control 
must be closely similar to that ex- 
ercised in New York and Ohio. 

“The fact of the enactment of 
such a housing law is a long step 
forward but will not of itself set 
things going. The Board of the 
R. F. C. will not accept the in- 
terest and intention of a building 
corporation as sufficient evidence 
of their probable success. 

"An architect's plan even if in- 
corporating all of the requirements 
of recognized good practice, will 
not be enough. Any proposal 
brought to the Board of the R. F. 
C. should include many facts and 
estimates which are available but 
are often overlooked. 

“There should be a statement 
of the population of the district 
and its changes; its vacancies, the 
number and size of building per- 
mits during the past ten or twenty 


Zenestra 


STEEL 
WINDOWS 


For Every Type of Building 


DETROIT STEEL PRODUCTS 
COMPANY 
Pacific Coaat Factory: Oakland 
Branches 
Los Angeles 


San Francisco Seattle 


Good BuildingsDeserve 
Good Hardware 


UD. 


PON 55. 
ШТ: ПІ 
(| | 


ІІ! 
f 


581 Market Street 
SUtter 6063 


Partitions 


Reinhold sectional wood aad 
glass partitions (interchange- 
able) may be adapted to any 
modern office requirement in a 


new or old building. 


Complete Information File 
sent on request 


Pacific Manufacturing 
Company 


High Class Interior Finish 
Quality Millwork 
Monadnock Bldg., 


San Francisco Los Angeles 
GA rfield 7755 AX ridge 9011 


1315 Seventh Street, Oakland 
GL encourt 7850 


641 Merrill Ave., 


91 


92 


Structural 


Steel 


Fabrication and Erection 


Br 0 


Pacific Coast 
Engineering Co. 
Foot of 14th St., Oakland 
HI gate 1322 


Anderson & Ringrose 
General Contractors 


320 Market Street, San Francisco 
Phone DO uglas 1373 


LEATHER-STEEL 
RUBBER-COCOA 
WOOD 


Mats and Mattings 
Ezy-Rug Carpet-Tex 


Manufactured and Installed by 


LEATHER 
MAT MFG. CO., Inc. 


340 Sansome St. San Francisco 


DINWIDDIE 
CONSTRUCTION 
COMPANY 


Builders of the new gymna- 
University of Cali- 


sium, 
fornia; Grace Cathedral, 
Russ Building and Hartford 
Insurance Building, San 
Francisco; Life Science 
Building, University о} Cali- 
fornia, Berkeley. 


CROCKER BUILDING 
SAN FRANCISCO 


years. The number and condition 
of mortgages and foreclosures; 
the character and foot frontage of 
stores and their history during the 
past two or three decades. This 
involves a complete inventory of 
the real estate and a careful 
analysis and interpretation of the 
facts. 


"Knowledge of these facts and 
many others should be a part of 
any report to a private investor 
and it has always been important 
but the architect, as a rule, has 
taken instructions from his client 
and has assumed that the client's 
judgment was sufficient evidence 
of probable success. The reclama- 
tion of old residence districts is a 
new problem and a failure at the 
beginning will act as a deterrent 
more discouraging than past in- 
difference. 

“Architects and others who 
hope to take advantage of the 
offer of the R. F. C. when their 
states have passed the necessary 
legislation should study their cities 
in advance as they have never be- 
fore examined them. There is very 
little past experience that may be 
accepted. 


“Plans for one city are rarely 
appropriate in all respects for an- 
other city and unless we know 
that our proposed plan fits prop- 
erly into the probable development 
of the town in question we are al- 
lowing those who have money to 
invest to take unnecessary chances. 


“The fact of R. F. C. loans is 
very important, but it does not 
solve the whole problem. This 
along with state laws gives a help 
without which no start could be 
made, but it does not free those 
who are investing money from all 
danger of money loss. 


"Architects and those who are 
asking for В. В. C. assistance 
must be prepared to answer a 
searching examination and this 
cannot be achieved without a thor- 
ough knowledge of the facts. 

“This is an admonition to start 
the study at once. Do not wait for 
legislatures to meet." 


STRUCTURAL STEEL 


WESTERN IRON WORKS 


141-147 BEALE STREET 
132-148 MAIN STREET 


San Francisco Phone DAvenport 2575 


REPUBLIC STEEL 


CORPORATION 


Rue 


Manufacturers of 
ENDURO Stainless Steel; ТОМ. 
CAN Copper Molybdenum Iron 
Sheets and Pipe; and Steel Pipe, 
Sheets and Reinforcing Bar for 

every building purpose. 
Write for information 
Rialto Building San Francisco, Calif. 


First Natl. Bank Bldg., Los Angeles 
Smith Tower Building, Seattle, Wash. 


IDHINSON 
О LBURNERSc 


For use in Commercial and 
Industrial Buildings, Apart- 


ment Houses and Homes. 


* 
S. T. Johnson Co. 


Main Office and Factory 
940-950 Arlington St., Oakland 


MacDonald & Kahn 


General 


Contractors 


CNO 


Financial Center Bldg. 
405 Montgomery St. 


San Francleco 


The Architect and Enaineer, December, 1932 


THE BUILDING 


S ALL buildings are seen, society has a 
right to demand that попе be ugly; the 
life of the community requires that none 
be unsafe or dangerous to health; social 
economy requires that they be not waste- 
ful of space or ill-suited to the purpose 
for which they are created. Every build- 
ing is lo some exteut a public matter— 
even a private house. No building should 
be erected that is not an attractive addi- 
tion to the landscape. A well-designed 
building 1s a more valuable property—a 
better. investment. A well-constructed 
building is a more economical invest- 
ment. No owner however gifted in other 
ways, no contractor however skilled, can 
design and build the simplest house equal 
in beauty, utility and cost to one com- 
pleted under the guidance of a trained 
architect. 


From A. Г. A. Document No. 186 
ae б ый. 2 


THE FOLLOWING FIRMS SUPPLYING MATERIALS, LABOR AND SERVICES TO THE ARCHITEC- 
TURAL PROFESSION AND SPECIFICALLY HAVING CONTRIBUTED THEIR BEST EFFORTS TO 
THE SUCCESS OF THE VARIOUS BUILDINGS APPEARING IN THIS ISSUE, DESIGNED AND SUPER- 
VISED UNDER MESSRS. KENT & HASS, ARCHITECTS OF SAN FRANCISCO, HEARTILY EN- 
DORSE THE ABOVE POLICY AND URGE ALL THOSE CONTEMPLATING THE ERECTION OF ANY 
BUILDING TO 


CONSULT AN ARCHITEC) UIS 


Т. D. Courtright Rucker Fuller Co. 
Pacific Lime & Plaster Co. Johns-Manville Corp. Van Fleet-Frecar Со. 
California Stucco Products Co. American Encaustic Tiling Jensen & Pedersen 
Gladding, McBean & Co. Company S & S Tile Co. 
Loop Lumber Co. Mallott & Peterson Oakland Planing Mill 
Fair Mfg. Co. Inlaid Floor Co, Cobbledick Kibbe Glass Со. 
Fabris Carpentier Co, General Electric Co. Boyd Lighting Fixture Co. 
A. J. Pollard Michel & Pfeffer Iron Works Port Costa Brick Works 
General Roofing Co. Pacific Mfg. Co. Spott Electrical Co. 
Aladdin Heating Corp. W. H. Picard, Inc. Rigney Tile Co. 
Raphael Company Marshall-Newell Supply Co. Anderson Bros. Planing 
W. Р. Fuller & Co. Alfred P. Fisher Mill & Mfg. Co. 
Remillard Brick Co. D. Zelinsky & Sons, Inc. Larsen & Larsen 

. D. N. & E. Walter Co. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Dinwiddie Construction 
Peter Bradley Company Company 
American Marble Co. Alta Roofing Co. Frank J. Klimm Co., Inc. 
O'Mara 67 Stewart Otis Elevator Co. James A. Nelson, Inc. 


Chas. Stockholm & Son W. €? J. Sloane Ca. Mullen Mfg. Co. 


Heating Practice 
and 54 Facilities. 
improve through the years 


JOHNSON 
HEAT CONTROL 


contributes to that improvement 


continual advancement" and 
careful stúdy of ever- 
chánging requirements 


Over a span of nearly 


HALF A CENTURY 


Johnson equipment in hospitals effects automatic 
regulation of heat in operating rooms, patients’ 
quarters, administrative offices, and service 
spaces. Thermostats are fitted with various types 


7) = Ты 
of adjusting mechanism, enabling nurses to vary BS! ] \ | 2 е. / HEALTH 


xt | | 
temperatures to suit all conditions. с ы >. | А / “\ /СОМҒОВТ 
Special applications of Johnson heat and l ( 
CONVENIENCE 


humidity control devices are arranged for oxygen 
chambers, incubators, sterilizers, and special 


purpose rooms. 


AUTOMATIC TEMPERATURE CONTROL SINCE 1885 


JOHNSON SERVICE COMPANY | 
Main Office and Factory | ) O H С O N 


MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN 


HEAT CONTROL 


Branch Offices in All Principal Cities 


The Architect and Engineer. January, 1933 3 


ии ————————— 


Thumb Tacks and Ts Square 


‚ыы 


OPEN letters by the President and 
Treasurer of the American Institute of 
Architects, addressed to the members, 
would seem to indicate that the Institute 
is having a struggle to wcather the de- 
pression and Treasurer Bergstrom docs 
not mince matters when he says that "the 
Institute is down to fundamentals. What 
it will do and become during this new 
year will depend entirely on the support 
received in payment of dues." 

The Institute now has 3,000 active 
members, but according to Mr. Berg- 
strom, only onc half of these may be able 
to continue their annual dues without 
some sacrifice. And the dues from these 
one half will not be sufficient to permit 
the lustitute to carry on those things 
which are considered essential to the 
welfare of the profession. Mr. Bergstrom 
states that if the Institute must depend 
on such dues only "then it will be obliged 
to give up its publicity work; to give up 
its program to secure the designing of 
public buildings for the practicing archi- 
tects; to give up its structural service 
work; to curtail further the visits of the 
directors to their Chapters; and, in brief 
—to become a skeleton organization." 

It would seem that financial assistance 
ought to be forthcoming from the wealth- 
ier members who are well able to give 
and give liberally. The State Associa- 
tion of California Architects is under- 
stood to be in splendid financial condi- 
tion and this organization might be in- 
duced to lend its assistance. 


5 506 

IT looks as if the five working 
day week with six hours to a day is not 
so far away аНег all. Legislatures are 
taking it up and various organizations 
are getting behind the movement with a 
determination to put the thing over. The 
San Francisco Supervisors have indorsed 
the plan but they have rather muddled 
things by disregarding the Impartial 
Wage Board's adopted scale and restor- 
ing "boom time" wages to workers on 
all municipal building projects. 

Six hours for five days a week, or 
30 hours of work per man, as against 
the 44 hour week heretofore in force, will 
permit employment of 50 per cent more 
men on a job or make the job last that 
much longer for each man. 

Z E 5 
AT the present time there are cer- 
tain unavoidable evils in the building in- 
dustry that will have to be eliminated 


if the new scheme is to be carried out 
effectively. Many mechanics who are 
now only partially employed are taking 
labor contracts at starvation prices, and 
they work on Saturdays and Sundays in 
order to add to their meager earnings. 
This practice, while it may obviously help 
the individual, is fundamentally so un- 
sound that by all means every effort 
should be made towards making it im- 
possible. Architects and material] dealers 
should join in a concerted drive to elim- 
inate this week-end construction work. 


CHESTER ROWELL SAYINGS 
WHEN the individual exercises 
his rights їп erecting а tall building fac- 
ing on a narrow street which is unable to 
take саге of the traffic from his building 
he imposes upon the community the ob- 
ligation to build a three-story street. 


Architects should welcome certain re- 
sults of standardization. They should 
welcome building laws because sound 
construction is not underbid by unsound 
construction because the 
prohibits the unsound. 


go- ernment 


The development of the “set-back” 
architecture of tall buildings is an in- 
stance of regulation giving an opportun- 
ity for great architects to exercise their 
individualism. 

No one architect can produce a build- 
ing of any magnitude, doing all of the 
planning and construction work himself. 
А collective organization of great mag- 
nitude is required. In some instances even 
the client is a great collective unit such 
as a public utility. And there is govern- 
ment regulation to be considered. Nobody 
cares whether the architect likes these 
conditions or not. He must adjust himself 
to them. 


ee 9% oe 
2% oe oe 


REMODELING and modernizing 
of Independence Hall, Philadelphia, in 
1739, is believed to be one of the first 
most important modernizing jobs in this 
country, according to records of the 
Commerce Department's Advisory Com- 
mittee on home modernizing. 

The Hall, known prior to 1776 as the 
“State House’, was completed in 1734, 
forty-two years before the signing of the 
Declaration of Independence. Within 
five years, according to historical data, 
it was discovered that it lacked the con- 


venience necessary for its purpose, and 
it was therefore modernized by the addi- 
tion of an east and west wing. 


That the property owners of today 
are also “house conscious” is evident 
from the substantial number of homes 
which have been repaired or remodelled 
as a result of organized home improve- 
ment and clean-up campaigns conducted 
in various cities by cooperating civic, 
professional and business organizations. 
These improvement campaigns include 
two major aims: To encourage сопипип- 
ity beautification and maintenance of 
property values, and to increase local 
employment and business. 


oe 2 +e 
oe Ф. % 


HERE is a more hopeful view of 
business based upon a recent survey of 
conditíons in the East: 


"The low point of business activity 
and security prices was reached in mid- 
summer, 1932, according to Franklin 
Wulff, president of Wulff, Hansen & Co., 
of San Francisco. 


“As the basis of his opinion Mr. 
Wulff cites the improved conditions in 
Germany and the Danubian states, the 
rapidly growing supply of monetary 
gold, the universal easy money policy 
on the part of all central banks, the vast 
improvement in our own banking situa- 
tion, and the potential market offered by 
120,000,000 Americans who for three 
years have deprived themselves of neces- 
sities and luxuries. 


"Mr. Wulff does not believe that re- 
covery will be as slow as is popularly 
imagined, his optimism being of consid- 
erable significance in view of the fact 
that he is one of the few observers who 
until recently has been consistently bear- 
ish since early in 1929." 


oe 2% 2% 
24 ** 


UNIFICATION 

'The plan for unification of the profes- 
sion docs not appear to have met with 
universal approval. The reports and let- 
ters that have come to the editors indi- 
cate that the debate in some quarters is 
getting acrimonious. But those in favor 
of unification have said little. Is this be- 
cause they feel the proposal needs no 
defense, or are they unaware of the 
opposition?" —/American Architect. 

Any question involving human rela- 
tionships is bound to produce a differ- 
ence of opinion.— Bulletin State Associa- 
tion of California Architects. 


The Architect and Enginecr, January, 1955 


ТНЕ 


s ARCHITECT |... 
AND ENGINEER 


NUMBER 1 


FREDERICK W. JONES, Editar 
EDGAR М. KIERULFF, Ass’t. Editar 


Contributing Editors 
CLARENCE К. WARD, San Francisca 


CARLETON MONROE WINSLOW, 
Las Angeles 


HAROLD W. DOTY, Portland, Ore. 
CHAS. H. ALDEN, Seattle, Wash. 


Consulting ond Advisory Editors 
J. HARRY BLOHME 
LEWIS P. HOBART 
TIMOTHY L. PFLUEGER 
ELMER GREY 
CLARENCE A. TANTAU 
WM.L. WOOLLETT 
JOHN J. DONOVAN 
JOHN BAKEWELL, JR. 
EDWIN L. SNYDER 
THOMAS J. KENT 
ALBERT F. ROLLER 
J. STEWART FAIRWEATHER 
JOHN W. GREGG 
EMERSON KNIGHT 
CHAS, H. CHENEY 
W. ADRIAN 
JULIAN С. MESIC 
Н. J. BRUNNIER 
L. H. NISHKIAN 


Corer Picture 
Frontispiece 
Tt 

29 


31 


Шо 23 


(Ө9һ15 ©6755 ие 


DETAIL, HOUSE OF ALFRED J. LUNDBERG 

Kent and Hass, Architects 

CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, SAN MATEO 

Kent and Hass, Architects 

RECENT WORK OF THOMAS J. KENT AND ANDREW T. HASS. 
ARCHITECTS 

Е. N. Kierulf 

AN ARCHITECT WHO WENT AFTER BUSINESS—AND GOT IT 
R. W. Sexton 

THE HOUSE OF PROFESSOR S. H. GRAF, CORVALLIS, OREGON 
James R. Fergusan 

MODERNIZING MAY BE FINANCED ON INSTALLMENT PLAN 
VICISSITUDES OF А YOUNG ARCHITECT 

Elmer Grey, Е. A. I. А. 


. THIS MODERNISM 


Dwight James Baum, Е. A. 1. А. 


. THE GRAPHIC SIDE OF A GREAT ARCHITECT'S ACHIEVEMENTS 


CAN MINOR WORK BE HANDLED АТ А PROFIT? 
Lionel L. Lebhar 


. SUBSIDENCE AND THE FOUNTAIN PROBLEM IN SAN FRANCISCO 


А. 4. Brawn, C. E. 

COMPETITION FOR DESIGN FOR A SPRING GARDEN SEOW 
WITH THE ARCHITECTS 

CHAPTER AND CLUB MEETINGS 


PLATES AND ILLUSTRATIONS 


. THE RECENT WORK OF KENT AND HASS, ARCHITECTS 


House of Mr. and Mrs. Will T. Jones; Congregational Church, San 
Mateo: Office of J. Barth & Co.; El Capitan Hotel, Merced; Store for 
John Rex, San Francisco; Office of Е. Е. Hutton & Company; House 
of Geo. C. Barry, Alameda; House of Alfred J. Lundberg, Alameda; 
House of R. H. Swayne, Alameda; Summer House of Mrs. Laura B. 
Westphal, Lake Tahoe: Tea House for Arthur C. Oppenheimer; Tea 
House for Frank C. Stratford. 


. HOUSE OF PROFESSOR 5. Н. GRAF, CORVALLIS, OREGON 


Plot and Ground Plan; Detail of Entrance; Exterior Views; Garden 
Front: Living Room; Laboratory and Workshop. 


. ELMER GREY 

. JOHN GALEN HOWARD, Е. А. I. А. 

. ORIGINAL U. $. COAST SURVEY MAP OF SAN FRANCISCO 

. MAP SHOWING SUB SOIL CLASSIFICATION IN SAN FRANCISCO 


ONGext Qonth 


A treat is in store for ARCHITECT ANN ENGINEER readers commencing with the 
February issue and continuing probably through the remainder of the year. 
The autographed drawings. embracing a life time of professional activity, 
of the late John Galen Howard, internationally known architect, will be 
published in portfolio form. This notable collection of architectural works 
will be prized by hundreds of former students under Mr. Howard, as well 
as by a host of enthusiastic admirers. 

Another unusually interesting feature for the February issue will be an 
article; “What is the Modern Sculptor Attempting to do?" by Warren 
Cheney, instructor in sculpture at Mills College. Illustrations of Mr. 
Cheney's work will be shown. 

The story of a Los Angeles landscape architect describes some suc- 
cessful work on Hollywood's mountain ridge. The illustrations are charming. 


Published monthly by ТНЕ ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER, ГХС. 
1662 Russ Building, San Francisco, California 


W.J. L. KIERULFEF, President ond Manager 
New York Representative——The Spencer Young Company, 299 Madison Ave., New York City 


FRED'K. W. JONES, Vice-President L. B. PENHORWOOD, Secretary 


Subscriptions—Umited States and Pan-American, $4.00 a year; single copy, $ .60. Canada and foreign countries, $6.00 a year. 


— € NE. = 


MAIN ENTRANCE, FROM PATIO, CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, 
SAN MATEO, CALIFORNIA 


KENT AND HASS, ARCHITECTS 


ТНЕ 
ARCHITECT 


AND ENGINEER 


JANUARY 1933 
VOLUME 112 
NUMBER ONE 


RECENT WORK OF THOMAS J. KENT AND 
ANDREW T. HASS, ARCHITECTS 


by 
GI. E. N. KIERULFF 
iii HE illustrations com- will of his client and fellow practitioners. 
prising the portfolio of some of the recent Mr. Kent once related to the writer, by 


work of Messrs. Kent and Hass, and for way of example, the story of a client's three 
which this brief foreword serves as an homes. The first, a modest small house of 


introduction, are on 
the surface a photo- 
graphic record illus- 
trative of an archi- 
tectural practice. Be- 
neath this surface, 
however, there is an 
underlying structure, 
a thoughtful and ef- 
ficient service to each 
individual client; a 
real endeavor to сге- 
ate that which ex- 
presses the individ- 
ual taste of the cli- 
ent within thebounds 
of sound architec- 
ture. To educate the 
average home build- 
er to understand the 
first principles of 
good taste architec- 
turally is one of the 
first steps of the rep- 
utable architect is 
required to take in 
gaining the ultimate 
respect and good 


HOUSE OF MR. AND MRS. WILL T. JONES 
OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 


Kent and Hass, Architects 


чп» 


noarchitectural merit 
and having no par- 
ticular charm, though 
the owner was aware 
of these things, he 
could not better them 
for some years. Lat- 
er came the move to 
a new house built to 
express this man's 
yearning for some- 
thing finer, some- 
thing more perma- 
nent, with improve- 
ments that made for 
a more livable home. 
Through the good 
taste and discretion 
of his architect, the 
client did not, meta- 
phorically speaking. 
leap from cottage to 
mansion for which 
leap he was by no 
means ready, but 
progressed in an or- 
derly manner. Still 
later, when cultur- 


S.LOH.LIHO?V 'SSVH АМУ .LNSM 


OH.LVIN NYS 'HOSHDHO TIVNOLLVOHHONOO ЧОЧ NOLLLLSdINOO 
NI NOISHG ӘМІММІЛА 'NV'Id ола аму JOOTA 15814 


ТИС УОКЕР а ГЕ Ы NOLO S "01 
а TP 


н етен aC Casi 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 12 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


S.LOH.LIHO?HV 'SSVH ANV .LN3M 


VINYOSITWD ‘OF. LVN NVS 
‘(HOUND IVNOLLVOSHHDNOO "IHONVHO 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER я 13 5» JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


DIRECTORS' ROOM, OFFICE OF J. BARTH 6 COMPANY, 
SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA 


KENT AND HASS, ARCHITECTS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 14 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


PERSPECTIVE STUDY, EL CAPITAN HOTEL, MERCED, CALIFORNIA 
Kent and Hass, Architects 


ally the owner had grown away from this 
second house, he again visited his arch- 
itect, this time ready with the knowledge 
and judgment that enabled him to state 
his preferences, understanding better the 
meaning of good architecture and able to 
appreciate it with an improved sense of 
what was suited to his taste, his surround- 
ings and his pocket-book. Cases of this type 
are legion and in a majority of instances it 
lies with the architect to gradually lead his 
client to a fuller understanding of architec- 
tural appreciation. 

'The photographs shown in this portfolio, 
of a commercial nature, are principally 


stockbrokers' offices in Pacific Coast cities 
and show the advanced state of combined 
taste and efficiency to which these financial 
firms have aspired. 

In particular, attention might be called 
to the office built in quarters in a large 
downtown hotel. The existing architecture 
was not disturbed but through a nice dis- 
cretion, flooring, fixtures and furniture were 
made to harmonize with the original design. 

The Congregational Church in San 
Mateo was won in competition and many 
concede it to be an outstanding example 
of ecclesiastical architecture in Northern 
California. Again there is definite evidence 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER в | 15 » JANUARY, МІМЕТЕЕМ THIRTY-THREE 


STORE FOR JOHN REX, DANERSK FURNITURE, SAN FRANCISCO 
Kent and Hass, Architects 


BROKERAGE OFFICE OF E. Е. HUTTON & CO., OAKLAND 
Kent and Hass, Architects 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER 4 16 b JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


T. D. Courtright, Builder 
ENTRANCE FRONT, HOUSE OF MR. AND MRS. GEO. C. BARRY, 
ALAMEDA, CALIFORNIA 


Kent and Hass, Architects 


2 — А Е жыш. B | 3 i 
3 Ё бат Жоок Pran SES 
JL 163 TS ў SECOND FLOOR PLAN 
[ «Жала am Pr 
AM | | 1 » = a од 


PLANS, HOUSE OF MR. AND MRS. GEO. C. BARRY, ALAMEDA, CALIFORNIA 
Kent and Hass, Architects 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 17 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


STAIR HALL, HOUSE OF 


MR. AND MRS. ALFRED J. LUNDBERG, 
LAKESHORE HIGHLANDS, OAKLAND 


Kent and Hass, Architects 


STAIR HALL, HOUSE OF 


MR. AND MRS. GEORGE C. BARRY, 


ALAMEDA, CALIFORNIA 


Kent and Hass, Architects 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 18 в JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


` 


GARDEN FRONT, HOUSE OF MR. AND MRS. GEO. С. BARRY, 
ALAMEDA, CALIFORNIA 


KENT AND HASS, ARCHITECTS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 19 > JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


Larsen and Larsen, Builders 


ENTRANCE FRONT, HOUSE OF MR. AND MRS. ALFRED J. LUNDBERG, 
ALAMEDA, CALIFORNIA 


Kent and Hass, Architects 


——— 


FIRST FLOOR PLAN, HOUSE FOR MR. AND 
MRS. A. J. LUNDBERG, ALAMEDA 


of a nicely executed and studied plan. Har- 
mony in detail is expressed throughout and 
as an architectural whole the building is 
pleasing, dignified and gracious. 

The photographs illustrating the resi- 
dence work of this firm demand but little 
written explanation. They portray excep- 
tional examples of architecturally sound, 
well proportioned and thoughtfully planned 
houses, with attention given to the small 
details that create a pleasing ensemble. 
Among the interesting pictures shown in 
this group of homes are two photographs 
and plans of a very old house in Alameda 
before and after receiving architectural 
treatment. 

The gardens illustrated show the results 
of a well balanced and nicely formulated 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 20 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


Aladdin Heating 


HOUSE OF MR. AND MRS. ALFRED J. LUNDBERG, LAKESHORE HIGHLANDS, 


OAKLAND 
Kent and Hass, Architects 


plan. However, the addition of one or two 
small details by the owner has rather de- 
tracted from the general charm of one of 
the gardens in question. 

The summer house of Mrs. Laura B. 
Westphal at Lake Tahoe, completed about 
two years ago, has been the center of no 
little public interest because of its lovely 
setting and good design. This place was 
illustrated somewhat fully in THE Авсн- 
ТЕСТ AND ENGINEER for August, 1931, 
and a number of the views are reprinted 
herewith by request. "Westlake" is not 
only a summer home for its owner but the 
house is so completely equipped that it may 
be used all the year round with comfort 
and enjoyment. 


SECOND FLOOR PLAN. HOUSE OF MR. AND 
MRS. A. ]. LUNDBERG, ALAMEDA 


TUE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER < 21 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREF. 


HOUSE OF MR. AND MRS. В. Н, SWAYNE, ALAMEDA, 
BEFORE ALTERATIONS 


Baar UC 
nar 
as. ac 


5 


„Р; 
Paneey 


Drs. ROM 
LIE 1 


FILLING | 
А 


Th 
ми ми 


Zur Fi ; 
А 


ж Шейн 


PLANS, HOUSE OF MR. AND MRS. В. Н. SWAYNE, BEFORE ALTERATIONS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 22 > JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


Jensen & Pederson, Builders 
HOUSE OF MR. AND MRS. R. H. SWAYNE, ALAMEDA, AFTER ALTERATIONS 
Kent and Hass, Architects 


SECOND FLOOR PLAN 


i 

vot =a 

ш - 
a 

) Frage hoo № is: „ш ш шш LN 


РЕЯ 


PLANS, HOUSE OF MR. AND MRS. В. Н. SWAYNE, AFTER ALTERATIONS 
Kent and Hass, Architects 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER A 23 > JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


HOUSE OF MRS. LAURA В. WESTPHAL, LAKE TAHOE, CALIFORNIA 
KENT AND HASS, ARCHITECTS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER < 24 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


HIGHWAY APPROACH, HOUSE OF MRS. LAURA B. WESTPHAL, LAKE TAHOE 
Kent and Hass, Architects 


т Р - Pe | 


ENTRANCE FRONT, HOUSE OF MRS. LAURA B. WESTPHAL, LAKE TAHOE 
Kent and Hass, Architects 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ж 25 к JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


DETAIL OF FIREPLACE, HOUSE OF MRS. LAURA В. WESTPHAL, LAKE ТАНОЕ 
Kent and Hass, Architects 


T 


РА СА Room 


PLANS, HOUSE OF MRS. LAURA B. WESTPHAL, LAKE TAHOE, CALIFORNIA 
Kent and Hass, Architects 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER di 26 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


DETAIL, HOUSE OF MRS. LAURA В. WESTPHAL, LAKE ТАНОЕ 
KENT AND HASS, ARCHITECTS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 27 p JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


v 


TEA HOUSE ON THE ARTHUR C. OPPENHEIMER PLACE, ALAMEDA 
Kent and Hass, Architects 


TEA HOUSE ON THE FRANK C. STRATFORD PLACE, ALAMEDA 
Kent and Hass, Architects 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 28 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


AN ARCHITECT WHO WENT AFTER 
BUSINESS — AND GOT IT 


| М boom times, the city 


may offer greater opportunities for an arch- 
itect than a small town does, but in dull 
periods the small town is far more lucra- 
tive. At least, this was the opinion of War- 
ren Shepard Matthews, a New York arch- 
itect, who, realizing that he had everything 
to gain and nothing to lose, closed his city 
office last May and established quarters for 
the practice of architecture in New Mil- 
ford, Connecticut, a small town about two 
and a half hours from New York by train. 


He chose New Milford for several rea- 
sons. [n the first place, it is readily acces- 
sible to the New York market; secondly, 
many New York people have recently built 
houses in the locality and they might rea- 
sonably be expected to be intelligent enough 
to recognize the benefits of architectural 
service; and, finally, there were no other 
architects located in the neighborhood. His 
first problem, then, was to get acquainted 
with these people, who lived there practi- 
cally nine months of the year, and sell his 
services. 


He engaged a secretary, a local girl, 
highly recommended by the Connecticut 
Light and Power Company, and who knew 
the country and the people. They then 
made a list of all the residents who were 
reasonably well off, not including the nat- 
ives, and mailed them cards announcing 
that the firm was prepared to take care of 
all kinds of architectural, building, and en- 
gineering work, no matter how small or how 


by А 
R. W. SEXTON in Pencil Points 


large. The local newspaper. recognizing 
the "news value" of a New York architect 
establishing an office in the town. assisted 
in the publicity campaign by running an 
article on its front page. 


Realizing that he might be called upon 
to do some work which required engineer- 
ing service, Mr. Matthews interested Henry 
L. Felt, an engineer, in the idea and their 
card thus bore the name: Matthews & Felt, 
architects and engineers. Mr. Felt had been 
a classmate of Mr. Matthews at Princeton. 
1912, and had been brought up in this sec- 
tion of Connecticut. 


Their offices, located over a store on the 
main street of the town, cost the $20 a 
month. They paid the secretary $12 a 
week, and they rented a small house where 
the two partners lived for $35 a month. 
They took with them a foreman carpenter 
from New York who, for $7 a day, acted 
as the superintendent on all work, and em- 
ployed local labor in all cases—including 
carpenters, plumbers, plasterers, steam fit- 
ters, electricians, etc. These men were only 
too eager to work for the firm and appreci- 
ated the opportunity to carry out plans Бу 
a registered architect. 


Telephone calls soon began coming in 
asking for opportunities to consult with the 
firm on various matters. Their first job was 
to reverse a pair of casement windows from 
in-swing to out-swing. The owner com- 


* Dircctor, Burcau of Architectural Relations. 


4» b» 


plained that during heavy гаш the win- 
dows, as previously hung. leaked badly. 
The job was done under the firm's superin- 
tendence by a local carpenter and the total 
charge was $30, including labor, material, 
and architect's fees of 15%. 'The owner 
was delighted with the result and the firm's 
service had been sold 100% to the first 
client. 


With the aid of personal calls, other 
work began to come in. The firm built a 
tractor bridge over a brook that ran through 
a farm and made it necessary for the owner 
to drive around a main road for a distance 
of three-quarters of a mile to reach his farm 
land that was only 300 feet from the house. 
The bridge cost $210 and the owner prob- 
ably will save enough money in gasoline 
charges and wear and tear on his tractor 
to pay for the cost of the bridge. 


The architect found from a personal call 
that another owner was depending entirely 
for water on a rain water reservoir. In dry 
seasons, especially, he had barely enough 
water to meet his requirements. Mr. Mat- 
thews suggested that they run a one-inch 
water line to a small stream on the prop- 
erty, an eighth of a mile distant. The job 
cost the owner $326, including a small sand 
filter, and he has since had no more worries 
about lack of water or its quality. 


In another case, the firm built a turn- 
around in the front yard of a house where 
the owner previously had had to back his 
car in and out of the garage at great incon- 
venience. А local contractor had at one 
time submitted a bid of $175 to build a new 
road, but the firm of Matthews & Felt had 
a much better plan and the entire charge 
for architectural service, labor and mate- 
rials was $52. 


And so it went on, until on October first, 
four months after the office had been 
opened, Mr. Matthews reported that the 
firm had done $36,000 worth of business. 
Although Mr. Matthews expects to resume 
his practice again in New York this win- 
ter, he has definitely decided to make ar- 
rangements whereby he will continue his 
telephone connection and all calls will be 
relayed to his city office. And he is even 
now making plans for enlarging his New 
Milford office next summer and intends to 
take two labor foremen from the city to 
supervise the local workmen. At one time 
during the past summer he had as many as 
forty men on the payroll and with a list 
of three hundred prospects, many of whom 
he has talked to personally, and with eco- 
nomic matters improved, he looks forward 
to a better season than he had the past 
year. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER < зо > JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


THE HOUSE OF PROFESSOR S. Н. GRAF, 


CORVALLIS, OREGON 


ШЕ recently completed 


residence of S. H. Graf in Corvallis, Ore- 
gon, is an outstanding example of good 
house planning. The style of architecture 
is modified English. Charming in its sim- 
plicity, the house is conspicuously lacking 
in ornamentation or architectural embel- 
lishment. 

The owner is Professor of Mechanics 
and Materials at the Oregon State College 
in Corvallis. The designer, Sheldon Brum- 
baugh, received his training in architecture 
at the Fontainbleu School of Fine Arts, 
Fontainbleu, France, and also additional 
architectural training at the University of 
Oregon in Eugene. 

The first floor plan includes an entrance 
hall, living room, dining room, kitchen with 
breakfast alcove and rear entrance hall 
with lavatory and toilet. This hall is also 
arranged for use as a photographic dark 
room. The rear entrance hall opens into 
the laboratory. The second floor plan in- 
cludes four bedrooms, two baths (one with 
glass door shower) wardrobe closets in 
three bedrooms and regular closet in guest 
room. 

The entire attic is floored over and ar- 
ranged for storage. Joists above the attic 
floor are 2x10 Douglas fir, this same wood 
having been used as structural members 
throughout the building. Оп top of the 
lath and plaster of the second floor ceiling, 
a 2 inch layer of calcined mineral product 
provides excellent insulation. The mater- 


by 
JAMES R. FERGUSON 


ial consists of fluffy grains weighing ap- 
proximately 10 lb. per cu. ft., having a high 
insulating value and preferable to finer 
powdered material because it has less ten- 
dency to filter through fine cracks which 
may occur in the plaster. 

The doors and wood trim on the first 
floor are walnut, and on the second floor, 
Philippine mahogany. Except for the kit- 
chen and laboratory, the floors are oak 
throughout. In the kitchen is a Douglas 
fir floor covered with linoleum while the 
laboratory is floored with concrete. 

The laboratory is an interesting feature 
of the house. It has a rustic ceiling, the 
rafters being 2x6 with panels between, 
placed so as to provide an air space of ap- 
proximately 3 inches. The interior walls of 
the laboratory are made of an excellent 
quality common red brick manufactured in 
Monroe, Oregon. For insulation there is 
an air space of 1 inch between the inside 
and outside brick walls. There is also a 
balcony in the laboratory, reached by a 
small stairway. This balcony connects at 
one end with one of the bedrooms in the 
main part of the house and at the other end 
with an attic room above the garage. The 
laboratory is finished in studio style and 
provides additional space for books and 
periodicals. Shelves have been installed 
along the balcony for files of technical 
bulletins and periodicals. This laboratory 
is especially equipped for photo-micro- 
graphic work, particularly along metallur- 
gical lines. 

The outside walls of the house are 42 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER “4 31 №» JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


(THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER <q 32 | JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


DETAIL OF FRONT ENTRANCE, RESIDENCE OF PROFESSOR 
S. H. GRAF, CORVALLIS, OREGON 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER A 33 > JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


RESIDENCE OF PROFESSOR 5. Н. GRAF, 
CORVALLIS, ORGEON 


-— 
mS Ж X Ж 
Ж B 


Im 


B 


~ > = 


р ые < em н СЕЗ есе ЧЕ „ 


PATIO FRONT, RESIDENCE OF PROFESSOR S. Н. GRAF, 
CORVALLIS, ORGEON 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER я 34 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


GARDEN FRONT, RESIDENCE OF PROFESSOR 5. Н. GRAF, 
CORVALLIS, OREGON 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 35 b JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


LIVING ROOM, RESIDENCE OF PROFESSOR 
S. H. GRAF, CORVALLIS, OREGON 


inch face brick, with 1 inch air space, 2-ply 
Cabot's quilt for insulation, wood sheath- 
ing, 2x4 studding, lath and plaster. The 
roof is of the best 5 to 2 inch cedar shin- 
gles. 

The heating system is entirely gas-fired, 
this modern fuel having been selected for 
its economy, cleanliness and efficiency. 

The kitchen of the Graf residence is 
equipped with a gas range and a gas-fired 
refrigerator. The gas fuel served in this 
locality has a heat content of 570 B. T. U., 
and from June 1, 1931 to May 11, 1932, 
a total of 379,300 cu. ft. were consumed by 
furnace, refrigerator, range and water 
heater, which averages a monthly fuel con- 
sumption of approximately 3,298 cu. ft. 
According to Professor Graf, the cost of 
this fuel is conservatively 15% less than 
liquid fuel would be for the same purpose. 

Numerous special convenience features 


KITCHEN, RESIDENCE OF PROFESSOR А 5 я 
S. Н. GRAF, CORVALLIS, OREGON have been embodied in this home, such as 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 36 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


LABORATORY, RESIDENCE OF PROFESSOR 
S. Н. GRAF, CORVALLIS, OREGON 


arrangement of switches and electrical out- 
lets; self-locking milk receiver; garbage re- 
ceiver; location of electric and gas meters 
So as to be readable from the outside of the 
house; mail delivery; wide platforms at the 
ends of the walks leading to front and rear 
entrances; living room, games room, mas- 
ters bedroom and laboratory wired for 
radio; telephone booth off entrance hall; 
master's bedroom and laboratory wired for 
extension phone. There are also many 
built in features, such as cabinets and 
drawers, full length mirrors in all bedroom 
doors. and ventilators in the bathrooms. 


The landscape architecture for the Graf 
residence was designed by Fred A. Cuth- 
bert, Assistant Professor of Landscape 
Architecture at the Oregon State College. 
M. C. Phillips, Associate Professor of 
Mechanical Engineering and Superinten- 
dent of Heating at Oregon State College, 
supervised the heating installation. 


BASEMENT OF GRAF RESIDENCE, 
SHOWING HEATING PLANT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 37 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


MODERNIZING МАУ BE FINANCED ON 


INSTALLMENT PLAN 


(), the various plans 


that have been put torward for facilitating 
and encouraging modernization and re- 
habilitation, perhaps the one that holds the 
most direct interest for building owners and 
managers is the one recently announced by 
the Rehabilitation Corporation. This or- 
ganization stands ready not only to help 
with plans and engineering advice, but also 
to finance the operation. The corporation, 
it is announced, is equipped to handle all 
phases of a modernization program for the 
owner or his agent, and stands ready to 
finance such work on the installment pay- 
ment plan up to $40,000,000. 

For months—years, in fact—interest in 
rehabilitation has been increasing and 
spreading. Building management interests 
were perhaps the first to see the possibili- 
ties of modernization, both for themselves 
and the country at large. Many years of 
inflated business activity, when rents were 
high and tenants plentiful, had in many 
buildings staved off obsolescence, or at 
least the realization of it, for some time. 
Thus, when the storm broke, these build- 
ings were found to be obsolete, run down 
and unrentable. 

This situation was becoming apparent in 
fact before the stock market crash, for over- 
production was cutting into the renting 
market long before 1929. À great number 
of buildings, therefore, badly needed mod- 
ernizing and repairs, especially when the 
depression struck with full force. Then the 
building management group was the first 
to show that modernization was really a 


national issue, for when the Federal gov- 
ernment began its investigation of means to 
stimulate industry, particularly the con- 
struction industry, this group quickly 
pointed out that construction had already 
been overdone, and that the hope for em- 
ployment in the building trades was in the 
rehabilitation of present structures. Since 
that time large interests, including the gov- 
ernment, have lent their support, culminat- 
ing in the appointment by President Hoover 
of the Committee on Industrial Rehabilita- 
tion, under the chairmanship of A. W. 
Robertson, of the Westinghouse Electric 
and Manufacturing Co. 

With all this, however, financing has 
been the foremost problem, in spite of the 
fact that numerous successful moderniza- 
tion jobs have proved the practical possi- 
bilities for boosting the income of old prop- 
erties. This financing difficulty was the 
principal factor behind the founding of the 
Rehabilitation Corporation. 

With the hope of solving this problem 
for the owner who was unable to improve 
his buildings, also to stimulate the business 
of architects and builders who would ob- 
tain employment if these owners were able 
to improve their properties, a few large in- 
dustrial companies sponsored the organ- 
ization of the Rehabilitation Corporation. 
These companies included the Anaconda 
Copper Mining Co. and its subsidiary, the 
American Brass Company, the Crane Com- 
pany, and the First Bancredit Corporation 
of Minneapolis and St. Paul. Associated 
with them are many other large corpora- 
tions in the building field, including: The 
Bigelow-Sanford Carpet Co., Carrier En- 


4 :: р 


gineering Co., Commercial Investment 
‘Trust, Devoe & Raynolds, Johns-Manville 
Corp., Kerner Incinerator Co., Morse Boul- 
ger Destructor Co., Otis Elevator Co. 
Petroleum Heat and Power Co., Preferred 
Utilities Co., Simmons Co., Richard E. 
Thibault, Inc., United States Rubber Co., 
and Westinghouse Electric and Manufac- 
turing Co. 


As to financing, a careful survey by the 
company indicated that in many cases re- 
habilitation could be made to pay for itself 
in a period of three years or less from the 
increased revenue produced. The typical 
financing plan, therefore, is to arrange in- 
stallment payments spread over a period of 
from one to three years. The company will 
undertake the job on a down payment by 
the owner of from 10 to 20 per cent of the 
total costs. 


The down payment is made at the time 
of signing the contract with the corpora- 
tion, the remaining payments being de- 
ferred until the completion of the work. 
Thirty days after the job is completed and 
accepted by the owner and the corporation, 
the owner starts to pay off the balance in 
equal monthly installments over the sched- 
uled period. 


The finance fees charged are very con- 
servative: 


For one year... No fee 
Eor two уел... 215% 
For three vears. ss 516% 
Remaining balance................. 6% 


In addition to the actual contract with 
the corporation, the owner signs a Condi- 
tiona] Sales Agreement, and also gives 
such other protection as may be deemed 
necessary to insure the receipt of the 
monthly payments. 


The service the Rehabilitation Corpora- 
tion makes available to the owner is by no 
means limited to financing. The company 
is equipped to take over the whole task 
from all angles, from original survey of the 
property and the income expectations to 
the completed job. In a statement from the 
corporation the functions it will perform 
are divided into four subdivisions, as fol- 
lows: 


71. Careful survey of both technical and 
economic aspects by an experienced staff 
of specialists, furnishing the owner an au- 
thoritative analysis and estimate involving 
practicability of design, functional effi- 
ciency, economy of operation, rentability 
and salability of buildings. 


"2. In co-operation with owner's arch- 
itect and real estate agent, detailed plans 
and estimates of materials and labor for 
modernization of building. supplemented 
by the co-operation of the organization of 
the leading manufacturers of the supplies 
and equipment required. 


"3. Careful supervision of the work by 
its staff on behalf of owner and mortgages. 


"4, The financing of the complete re- 
habilitation of a building on a deferred 
payment basis, bearing such modest month- 
ly charges that the owner should be able 
to meet them readily through savings ef- 
fected and increased revenue obtained." 


In other words, working with the build- 
ing manager and his architect, the corpora- 
tion will plan and supervise a complete 
modernization job, always with the proviso, 
of course, that the work can be conserva- 
tively estimated to pay out. The company 
points out that it is organized solely for 
modernization work, stating, "The Reha- 
bilitation Corporation has placed on its 
staff some of the best experts in all phases 
of this work, such as problems of layout, 
income, operation and alteration, and is 
concentrating on this type of work exclu- 
sively. Work of this nature is a science in 
itself and until now has not been studied 
as it should be." 


For this comprehensive service the com- 
pany charges a fee which ranges up to a 
maximum of 10 per cent of the cost of the 
alteration. 


Considerable emphasis is placed on the 
point of consultation with real estate and 
management companies. In addition to its 
own staff the company will from time to 
time employ real estate firms as consultants. 


"The company will also execute the final 
plans, even to the point of letting contracts. 
When an operation has demonstrated its 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER x» 39 > JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


chances for success, after accurate esti- 
mates as to costs have been made, and after 
estinates of income and operating expenses 
have been obtained from experienced real 
estate men, the company will obtain bids 
and award contracts, relieving the owner 
of even the handling of the details, such as 
paying contractors, in case he is managing 
the property himself. 


Though the company has been in oper- 
ation for a few months, it has withheld an- 
nouncement of its plan until it has been 
tried out in an actual case. This trial job 
has been completed, and, it is said, with 
good success, and the company is ready to 
extend its operations rapidly up to the 
$40,000,000 limit of its financing. It is 
hoped that with this aid modernization jobs 
will be undertaken in greatly increasing 
numbers, that mortgages and large estates 
will take advantage of the plan as well as 
individual owners and managers. It is 
pointed out that many properties now in 
foreclosure can be salvaged and made rent- 
able, also salable, by rehabilitation. Also 
that many a property can be saved from 
foreclosure if the lending institution will 
co-operate with the equity owner in making 
use of the facilities the corporation has 
built up. As for estates, they can carry on 
a much greater volume of modernization 


and rehabilitation with the financing aid 
thus made available to them. 

The first instance mentioned above is a 
large apartment house at 1361 Madison 
Avenue, New York, which is on the north- 
east corner of Madison and 95th Street. 
This house was thirty-two years old, and 
hopelessly out-of-date. It contained suites 
of six, seven, eight, and nine rooms, and 
even the larger ones had only one bath. 

The problem of renting these apartments 
was so serious, the company says, that the 
management had advised the owner either 
to modernize it completely or demolish the 
structure to save taxes and operating costs. 
A contract was made between the owner 
and the Rehabilitation Corporation and the 
house was completely altered. The inter- 
ior was changed completely, with new lay- 
outs and new decorations and equipment. 
The exterior shell was virtually the only 
thing not changed. Some $110,000 was 
spent on this work. 

The job was completed in about three 
months, being rushed to be ready for the 
October 1 renting season. And in spite of 
the fact that it was impossible to show the 
apartments until about a week before Oc- 
ober 1, the renting progressed very satis- 
factorily. The renting, it is said, demon- 
strated that the operation was a financial 
success. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER Б. 40 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


VICISSITUDES OF А YOUNG ARCHITECT 


Third of a Series of Reminiscent Sketches of 
the Early Architectural Practice of the Author 


| HE owner of the ranch 


looked me over and asked me whether | 
knew how to handle horses. One of the 
foolish things I had done in Milwaukee 
one time was to purchase a half-broken 
broncho that had been shipped there from 
the west and ride him for awhile. He no 
longer bucked but that comprised about 
the full extent of his adaptation to civil- 
ized society. So now I could truthfully say 
that I did know something about horses. 
"Well then," said the owner of the ranch, 
"Go out to Hollywood and look the place 
over. À young Englishman is in charge. 
After that if you still want the job you can 
have it." 

The ranch consisted of nine acres mostly 
planted out to young orange trees and had 
a partially furnished house on it, a large 
barn and some livestock. It was situated in 
what now is the very heart of Hollywood's 
business district. Where then were un- 
paved country lanes overarched with 
drooping pepper trees, tall office buildings 
now rise. Where then were dimly lighted 
streets, Neon signs now blaze forth at night 
and Kleig lights shoot fingers of light into 
the sky announcing film premiers. 

The Englishman was very agreeable and 
assured me that he could show me how to 
do whatever would be expected of me with 
which I was unfamiliar. I asked what that 
might be. "Well," he said, “(о hitch and 
unhitch the horses, milk a cow, and mostly 
to irrigate and cultivate the orange trees. 
You will be expected to sleep in the barn, 
but it's so alive with fleas that you could 
never stand it. The old man seldom comes 
out. ] advise you to get some blankets and 
sleep in the house." So I followed his ad- 
vice and made myself very comfortable. A 
large irrigating reservoir outside the kitchen 
door served for a morning plunge. 

The Hollywood Hotel had been built at 
that time and one of the first things I did 
was to interview its manager. I told her that 


by 
ELMER GREY RALA 


l intended to take my Sunday dinners there 
and asked whether there would be any 
objection to my sitting around there eve- 
nings as well, since the empty ranch house 
would be uninviting. She gave me a very 
cordial welcome. The first evening I went 
over I met a man who had known me in 
my home town and who introduced me to 
several other guests. Consequently I soon 
felt acquainted. And frequently as another 
consequence I worked in a black shirt and 
overalls on the ranch during the day and 
ша “их” joined the dancers at the hotel 
in the evening. The combination was too 
much for some of the guests. A hired hand 
by day and an assumed equal at night was 
outrageous! So it became the subject of 
considerable gossip and as such reached 
the ears of one of my friends. She hap- 
pened to be a young lady with a lively 
sense of humor and also a secure position 
and she decided to have some fun out of 
it. She reasoned that while they were talk- 
ing they might as well talk more. She would 
give them something real and delectable to 
talk about. So she gave an elaborate ball 
at the hotel to which she invited some of 
these outraged guests, and also invited me 
—and gave me the first two dances on her 
program! 

All this may seem amusing enough now, 
but at the time it had also another aspect. 
To like people of your own kind and yet be 
able to associate with only a few such; to be 
thrown constantly and intimately with 
others who do not speak your own langu- 
age; to be in a community that is growing 
rapidly and not be able to participate in 
its growth; to know that you have the talent 
for such participation yet not feel well 
enough to use it—all this was maddening. 

Our imaginations, ever more expansive 
than our environments, overleap the bar- 
riers of such incongruous situations and 
resent them. Feeling belittled by the daily 
round of uninspiring duties they impose, 
one longs for a larger life, for more con- 
stant companionship with those who can 


qa р 


Bre 
— - 
— 


ELMER GREY, EXERCISING HIS EMPLOYERS SADDLE HORSE ON A 
HOLLY WOOD RANCH 


augment his knowledge, and bring satisfac- 
tion to his soul. 

So I do not set my experience up as an 
example. My advice is try to avoid it. If 
you are young and ambitious, work but rest 
too. The human mind and the human body 
are both delicate pieces of mechanism. If 
you have either one or the other that is like 
an Elgin watch don't treat it like a Big Ben. 
Go slower and win by a longer race. To 
work as a hired hand on a ranch at $25 a 
month may sound interesting after it's 
over, but at the time it is not inspiring! 

One guest at the hotel was a young lady 
who owned a saddle horse that was cared 
for by a stable man in a barn near by. He 
took his meals at the same cheap boarding 
house where mine were provided. One of 
my duties on the ranch was to exercise an 
hour each day, a magnificent saddle horse 
that had been left there by the owner. The 
result was that frequently I lunched with a 
stable man and an hour later went riding 
with his fair mistress! 

Му boss and his wife had gone to Cata- 
lina for an extended vacation and while 
there met some of my friends. When the 


wife returned she brought one of them back 
with her as a guest. One day when I was 
working in the orchard this guest and her 
hostess suddenly confronted me. The for- 
mer greeted me cordially, but her hostess 
did not propose to recognize her husband's 
hired hand! Finally my friend noticed the 
omission and turning to her said, "Why 
Mrs. N ‚ dont you know Mr. Grey? 
Permit me to introduce you!" 

The job at the ranch finally fizzled out, 
but the experience, like the good ending in 
the story book, had two very proper se- 
quels. When [ resumed my architectural 
practice some years later the manager of 
the Hollywood Hotel became the leading 
spirit in the project of building the Beverly 
Hills hotel, a $200,000 enterprise, and to 
him whom she had formerly known as a 
ranch hand she gave the commission of 
planning it! About the same time also the 
ranch was sold, which threw the English 
manager who had been very kind to me 
out of a job; and within ten days time I 
was able to secure for him even a better 
job than he had before. 

(To be continued) 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 42 > JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


THIS MODERNISM 


by 
А TORRENT of 


DWIGHT JAMES BAUM in Pencil Points 
words has been written for and against 


Modernistic architecture during the time 
that has passed since the first enthusiast 
appeared on the architectural horizon. 
Louis La Beaume of St. Louis, at the recent 
convention of the American Institute of 
Architects in Washington, said, at the be- 
ginning of a debate on the subject: 

“I am rather inclined to the opinion that 
it is the modernists who are forcing this 
discussion. The stand - patters seldom 
have to force anything. All they have to 
do is to sit tight or stand tight with the 
weight of custom and inertia and respecta- 
bility behind them. This, of course, is mad- 
dening to the modernists, and the madder 
they get the more they indulge in excess. 
The corollary to this statement is that the 
greater the excesses of the modernists, the 
greater and naturally the more irritating the 
complacency of the conservatives." 

Personally, I feel somewhat as does 
Charles Z. Klauder, of Philadelphia, who 
recently said, "I am so tired of reading of 
architecture that is functional, of meeting 
economic conditions, etc." I believe that 
most of us are trying to forget the discus- 
sion. Perhaps it is fortunate that we are 
building but little today for we seem to be 
in a period of experimentation when the 
desire is only for novelty. So short-lived 
is any given phase of modernistic design 
that even Shelter. the most modern of our 
magazines, has, in a recent issue, called 
one of the important new buildings at the 
Chicago Exposition a case of Infantile 
Paraylsis. А desire for sensational pub- 
icilty seems to fill the air. If any of us, after 
years of study, do not agree with these 
methods and ideas, we are accused of being 
old-fashioned and reactionary. 


We still have with us in America many 
horrors of our own past—that epidemic of 
Victorian Gothic, the vogue of Queen 
Anne and Mansard, then the flood of heavy 
brutal Romanesque, cast iron monstrosities, 
and so on. Now comes the question: "Are 
we entering upon another period that will 
be looked at askance twenty years from 
now?" Always we of the present think we 
are different from and superior to those of 
the past. It is always the past generation 
that made the mistakes for "the King can 
do no wrong." Therefore, no one is popu- 
lar who questions the motives of the pres- 
ent. 

Now men are coming forward willing to 
throw away all of the good accomplished 
since early Colonial days, each believing 
himself above the mistakes of the past, yet 
in some way able to accomplish stylistic 
originality without considering precedent. 

| do not believe that we should copy 
religiously the Classical or Renaissance or 
any other of the types that have come down 
to us, but I do claim that we cannot, as 
some modernists are trying to do, throw 
away all teachings of the past. We should 
not be mere copyists. We can, however, 
still consider the past, even if we are at the 
threshold of the development of a new 
American Architecture. 

To the public and our clients, a building 
can be a success in only two ways; it can 
be practical and it can be beautiful. This 
means that it must function and that it must 
be good to look at, producing pleasurable 
emotions, if it is to prove satisfactory. 
Meeting the first of these requirements is a 
technical matter, while giving to a building 
the requisite suitability, expressiveness, and 
beauty of design is a true art. 

Now, an art does not spring up over- 
night, or in one generation or in ten genera- 
tions; it grows through the centuries. It is 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E: 43 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


not created from a formula or out of the 
consciousness of one man or group of men. 
It does not result from a mere desire to do 
something different or from any whim or 
fancy or from any man's longing to appear 
in the spotlight. 


An art develops as an expression of the 
life of a people and of the race. Its growth 
cannot be forced. Its roots must strike deep 
into the rich, fertile soil of human experi- 
ence. Seeds of desire for popular acclaim 
sown in the shallow soil of egotism produce 
only noxious plants that wither and die 
quickly. Even the efforts of well-intentioned 
and earnest men to create an art out of 
their own limited resources meet with fail- 
ure. Art expressions that reflect the life and 
characteristics of the few also perish. 


That these things are true can be seen 
clearly by reviewing the history of any art, 
particularly the art of architecture, the 
mother of them all. 


The Egyptians, the Greeks, the Romans 
and all others down to our own day, took 
what was adaptable to their needs from the 
architecture of times earlier than theirs. 
They incorporated these traditions, forms, 
and principles with their own methods of 
building, with motives derived from their 
surroundings and with expressions of their 
own life and times, creating characteristic 
styles that grew with the rise of the nations 
and degenerated with their decline. 


Are we so much more highly endowed 
with artistic ability that we can wisely take 
an entirely independent course? Or is it 
simply that there are those among us who 
are incapable of recognizing their limita- 
tions and their opportunities? 


Traditionalism is not necessarily reac- 
tionary. Anyone who is at all well ac- 
quainted with Greek architecture knows 
that it showed constant growth until it 
began to decline, and it was developed 
from older traditions. The same thing is 
true of each of the great styles. 


Consciousness of our own modernity is 
a good thing: so is our sense of individual- 
ity as a people and our desire to solve our 
peculiar problems. The great nations of 
the past felt these same things, but did not 
break with the traditions. They held fast 


to all that was useful to them and went 
forward from where they stood. 


Regardless of whatever any man or 
group of men may wish or say to the con- 
trary, that is what we, too, shall do. It is 
inevitable, for it is the law of natural prog- 
ress and not to be turned aside. 

Our buildings must be modern of neces- 
sity, modern in that they meet present-day 
practical requirements and are built by the 
methods and with the materials that are 
most suitable and economical today. But 
this does not mean that they need to be 
devoid of everything that recalls the past 
and be factory-like or ornamented stupidity 
with zig-zags. 

Our buildings must be traditional of nec- 
essity, if they are to be satisfactory, for the 
simple reason that the proponents of radi- 
cal modernism have not to date produced 
any new means of giving them the requi- 
site aesthetic qualities, the character and 
the beauty that are readily available in the 
historic sources. Radical modernism cannot 
displace modern traditionalism until it is 
able to equal the expressiveness, flexibility, 
and richness of the cumulative results of 
the thousands of years of earnest effort on 
the part of the world's ablest architects that 
are embodied in the traditions. That is 
rather a large order. 

It is true that, in our past, Romanesque 
was often used in types of structures not 
fitted to its use, especially before the age 
of steel when the combination of massive 
walls and details resulted in dark interiors 
where light was needed. 'The same objec- 
tion holds good in the case of many build- 
ings screened by deep classical colonnades 
with slit-like windows, providing, with their 
shaded deep reveals, impossible working 
spaces beyond. 

That does not mean, however, that we 
are not to use those styles. Any problem 
must be analyzed and studied to obtain sat- 
isfactory results. As an example to illus- 
trate the point, take Richardson's Pitts- 
burgh City Hall, considered a great ex- 
ample of modern architecture when it was 
built. T'hen consider the New York Acad- 
emy of Medicine by York and Sawyer. 
This latter is not just a "style crib" but a 
building designed with feeling both as to 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 44 к JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


its function and appearance. The motifs 
were both derived from the same source, 
yet the newer example is alike practical and 
attractive. 

Nothing can be said for the kind of tra- 
ditionalism that has been responsible for 
the perpetration of many architectural ab- 
surdities during the past thirty years or so, 
the sort of thing that gave birth to build- 
ings of modern construction, built to serve 
modern needs, but designed in elaborate 
historical fashion which interfered with the 
proper functioning of the building and 
called for much costly and unnecessary 
false construction. Building investors ob- 
jected to that kind of thing more vigorously 
and effectively than the most violent mod- 
ernists, for it hit their pocketbooks. It re- 
duced the earning capacity of their build- 
ings in addition to increasing the original 
cost unduly. They, quite rightly, refused to 
permit that to continue. But it is this mis- 
use of traditionalism that modernists keep 
on talking about, something that is no 
longer a live issue. 


Many modernists are not as modern as 
they would have us think them or as they, 
perhaps, believe themselves to be. Much of 
their ornamentation is old Egyptian. Assyr- 
ian, or Mayan in basic character and often 
in its motives as well. Other old sources 
that are not well known to the public are 
drawn upon. These designs are not new, 
but merely unfamiliar, and are rendered 
with certain mannerisms in an effort to give 
them the appearance of freshness and to 
tie them in with the general design of the 
building. This kind of modern ornament is 
usually much superior to the inventions, the 
lightning strokes, and linoleum patterns. 
There is plenty of this unfamiliar docu- 
mentary material to draw upon. The old 
Polynesian, carved-wood canoe paddles, 
illustrated in a single article in one of our 
architectural magazines about twenty-five 
years ago, provide enough fresh designs 
to ornament the entire modernist output of 
buildings for a long while to come. 

The recourse of modernism to historic 
sources is not confined to ornamentation, 
for the origin of the silhouette and massing 
of many of the buildings, is to be found in 
older buildings, some in Europe, others far 


afield. Much of the interior treatment is 
basically Japanese and it has had an influ- 
ence upon the exterior design. 


So far as the much talked of “abstract 
ornament” is concerned, the idea is old and 
perfectly good. Possibly sometime a mod- 
ernist may produce a design as excellent 
as the classic egg-and-dart derivative of 
the old Egyptian painted lotus border or 
something comparable in beauty to the 
Saracenic abstractions in fretwork. Objec- 
tion to traditional design is sometimes made 
on the ground that it is decoration, but 
where is the difference in this respect be- 
tween the egg-and-dart moulding and the 
favored modernist mouldings. The most 
pleasing type of modern applied decoration 
seems to be the old fluted flat pilaster effect 
of Greek Doric antecedents (with the base 
and capital shaved off). A very successful 
example of this treatment is the new South- 
ern Railroad Building in Washington. This 
seems to be rational surface decoration, 
when handled with as much skill as is 
shown here. While there is a feeling of 
originality, there is still a traditional back- 
ground worth considering. 


We hear a great deal about truth and 
expression of construction, but how about 
the trick that has come to be one of the 
chief formulas of modernism—that of sup- 
pressing the spandrels, which mark the 
floor levels, to create vertical lines on a 
building? Or what about the other school 
which stresses the horizontal lines and 
hides the supports? Is it not better and 
more honest to enrich the outer shell of a 
building with good detail of historic origin, 
used with due regard for modern require- 
ments and construction, than to resort to 
such juggling of the construction to secure 
a decorative effect? 


The poverty of radical architecture is 
appalling, its stark nakedness and its feeble 
attempts at adornment are usually ridicu- 
lous when they have not some traditional 
origin. It drives designers to subterfuges 
such as the typical one just mentioned. 


It is not only in good ornament that mod- 
ernism is sadly lacking, but in the develop- 
ment of structural elements into architec- 
tural forms. The column was a structural 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 45 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


part of the Greek post and lintel system of 
building, but it was not allowed to remain 
merely a post. Without any contradiction 
of its structural function, it was made beau- 
tiful. Its part in the construction was even 
more fully expressed by this treatment. 
What parallel is there in modernism for 
this? 

The importance of the plan is spoken of 
as though its recognition were peculiar to 
modernism and contrary to the practice of 
traditional design, but was not every well- 
trained architect who received his instruc- 
tion previous to the present furore im- 
pressed with the fact that the plan must be 
the starting point of his design and that it 
must be studied to function in such a way 
as to serve the purposes of the building? 


Starting with the plan in this way, the 
designing of the building is largely deter- 
mined by it. The character suitable to the 
nature and environment of the building is 
also considered. This decided upon, the 
appropriate detail naturally follows. all of 
those elements being combined to make a 
modern building that is enriched by tradi- 
tions that give it a completeness and human 
appeal which radical modernism lacks. 


As in any movement, there are men of 
ability who take the middle course, who 
design without thought of sensationalism, 
with respect for the past and in a new spirit, 
evolving a live architecture. This, I believe, 
is best expressed in some of the work of the 
late Bertram Goodhue. 


Recently it became necessary for two of 
the great institutions teaching architecture 
to issue warnings to their students. The 
director of the Beaux-Arts Institute of De- 
sign warned students in part as follows: 


"It would seem to be wise at this time 
to bring to the attention of the students, 
particularly in the work of the Beaux-Arts 
Institute of Design, and their instructors, 
as well, a growing feeling of conviction on 
the part of the Juries that the standard of 
design, as evidenced by the current exhibi- 
tion, leaves much to be desired. 


“We are no doubt in a period of experi- 
ment and investigation. The men writing 
the programmes endeavor to make their 


problems interesting and stimulating. The 
Juries, finally, do their utmost to be sym- 
pathetic, patient, and understanding. What 
lies between is the effort of the student and 
his instructor and we of the Juries can only 
judge results as we see them. We find a 
universal tendency to present so-called 
modern solutions in facade, and the plans 
suggest the same principle. What we also 
find, to our annoyance (and it is said ad- 
visedly and firmly). is, that the bulk of the 
work is modern merely in the fact that 
forms supposed to be characteristic of the 
new architecture are shown with little un- 
derstanding of the antecedents of these 
forms and with little conception of the real 
basis of modern design. 


"Let us face the facts squarely. If mod- 
ern architecture, by which we mean ra- 
tional interpretation of new problems, is to 
be good, we will be just as careful to avoid 
repetition of unpleasant modernistic detail 
as the cast incongruities of the Victorian 
Era. Modern architecture is not going to 
become a style based on Gropius or Taut: 
Wright or Corbusier. It will demand in- 
telligent, clearly reasoned solutions of plan 
—as ingenious as you like, but above all 
things simple, direct, and honest in the ex- 
pression of the problem." 


The dean of the Department of Archi- 
tecture at New York University recently 
issued a statement along similar lines. 
While recognizing the modern trend as 
"one of the most significant developments 
in the whole history of architecture," he 
emphasized the necessity for arrangement 
and composition "to satisfy man's love for 
beauty" and objected to what he termed “а 
crude mixture of misunderstood modern 
motives thrown together without regard to 
construction, functional requirements, or 
common sense. 


Of course many students feel that mod- 
ern architecture offers a fine opportunity 
to avoid the research and study involved 
in working in the various historical styles. 
This tendency is being curbed which is one 
of the most hopeful signs. Where we find 
thorough training in the best traditions of 
design we find men designing buildings 
which will endure. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ES 46 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


А point forgotten by many men who 
admit they are modernists is that Goodhue, 
probably the most original of our able men, 
did not throw overboard all considerations 
of the past. Because Cram or Bacon de- 
signed in Gothic or Grecian does not mean 
that they wanted to design only in those 
periods. Our problems are different from 
those of any other people and yet a large 
number of our men have met them so suc- 
cessfully that our architecture has won ad- 
miration of the world. Yet some want to 
start anew instead of continuing on from 
where we are now. Our only quarrel with 
a new architecture is on that point. Let us 
continue if we can to improve, with the 
hope of eventually developing a distinctive 
architecture. We can't do it if we start out 
with cubist methods. 


Packing box architecture with misplaced 
color may be evidence of a striving for a 
new architecture but it is quite painful while 
it is being administered. The Chicago Trib- 
une building is modern and new, an able 
handling of the problem, yet it was based 


on precedent. On the other hand, some of 
the buildings of nearly the same mass on 
Fourth and Seventh Avenues in the New 
York midtown sections are surely new as 
to mass and color but also a failure as to 
all principles of good design. 


There seem to be two classes of moderns. 
The able, thinking men are striving to ex- 
press modern terms in a manner that will 
live, the radical element is apparently think- 
ing only of clever effects. 


One group appears to feel that the past 
is endeavoring to shackle the present. In- 
stead of that, it is only showing the way to 
greater heights and progress. There has 
been a gradual upbuilding through centur- 
ies, now one country, now another, contin- 
uing on until now it seems as though we 
have the great opportunity. I hope that we 
are on the road to a distinctive American 
architecture, that our approach will be 
gentlemanly, and that American genius 
will evolve something of scholarly merit in- 
stead of depending on mere superficial clev- 
erness. 


Courtesy Southwest Builder and Contractor 


PERSPECTIVE OF PROPOSED NEW Ц. $. POST OFFICE BUILDING, REDLANDS 


G. Stanley Wilson, Architect 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER < 47 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


THE GRAPHIC SIDE OF A GREAT 
ARCHITECT'S ACHIEVEMENTS 


De to his promin- 


ence as a leader of his 
profession, coupled with 
the interest created by a 
recent exhibition of draw- 
ings by the late John 
Galen Howard, Е. A. I. 
A., THE ARCHITECT AND 
ENGINEER will publish a 
series of portfolios of Mr. 
Howard's work beginning 
February, and continuing 
from month to month, un- 
til the more interesting 
subjects of his career have 
been covered from his first 
executed project to his 
final achievement. In pre- 
senting this series of orig- 
inal drawings by Mr. 
Howard's own hand the 
publishers feel they are meeting a general 
demand on the part of the many hundred 
practicing architects and students who 
spent their preparatory years under his 
helpful tutelage. Mrs. Howard has gra- 
ciously consented to the publication of 
these plates, further reproduction of which 
is reserved by her. The series of portfolios 
is intended to give an informative, though 
condensed, idea of the graphic side of a 
great architect's achievements. 

Only rarely have collections of docu- 
ments as extensive as this of Mr. Howard's 
work been preserved. [л this case it is the 
more remarkable when one realizes that, 
during his life time, he moved from Boston 
to Paris, to New York, to Berkeley, and 
San Francisco; that his office was burned 
out in the San Francisco conflagration of 
1906 and that, later, his home in Berkeley 
was much damaged by fire. 

Mr. Howard had a systematic way of 
signing his drawings, even in his school 
days, so that the works of his own hand are 
easily identified. The percentage of these 


ғ 


JOHN GALEN HOWARD 


autographed drawings is 
high, especially in view of 
the many calls on his per- 
sonal time. His every nat- 
ural inclination, quite as 
much as his conviction of 
an architects functions, 
inevitably kept his facile 
hand busy. 

The earliest sketches 
found among the many 
portfolios are dated 1883, 
when the future architect 
was nineteen years old. 

Some of Mr. Howard's 
earliest "school" drawings 
are preserved. They were 
made at the Massachu- 
setts Institute of Technol- 
ogy when he was twenty 
or twenty-one. Admitted- 
ly these drawings are not outstanding indi- 
cations of genius, (Brunelleschi at about 
the same age, was competing for the bronze 
doors of the Baptistry at Florence), but the 
earliest Howarde drawings, nevertheless, 
reflect skill of hand and fineness of taste. 
They show, for example that, to his way 
of thinking, the jigsaw was not an authori- 
tative tool for the builder; not ranking with 
square, trowel, chisel and plane. 

After the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, there came an interlude in his 
academic training which included valuable 
contacts with H. H. Richardson, Charles 
F. McKim and Stanford White; then a 
short sally into California where he worked 
on drawings for the old California Theater, 
on Bush Street, San Francisco, and made 
some fine water color and pen sketches, 
(1888) before hurrying east and to Paris. 

Portfolios to follow will show the growth 
of Mr. Howard's talents, and will include 
drawings from his Ecole des Beaux Arts 
days, from his work while in New York, 
and later subjects produced on the Coast. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 48 | JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


CAN MINOR WORK ВЕ HANDLED АТ 


А PROFIT? 


W. ENEVER a pros- 


pective client announces, "I cannot afford 
an architect," and therewith ceases to be 
a client, our professional standing has been 
attacked. We are an essential part of any 
building program, regardless of its size, 
and must combat all opinion to the con- 
trary. 

The business we lose annually because 
of the mistaken idea that an architect is 
necessary only for work of a certain mag- 
nitude may be estimated from any reliable 
chart of building operations. We find a 
surprising volume of small work, the bulk 
of which goes directly to the building con- 
tractor and which does not benefit from 
the services of an architect. Since it would 
be to the advantage of both owner and 
architect if most of this work received some 
form of architectural assistance, it is evi- 
dent that this field is worth cultivating. In 
these lean times can we continue to neg- 
lect it? 

Before we blame either owner or con- 
tractor for this elimination of the architect, 
let us see whether we ourselves are not 
most at fault. If an owner believes that he 
is not able to afford an architect instead of 
understanding that he cannot afford to do 
without one, may it not be that in too many 
instances we have proved expensive when 
employed for minor work? And, if so, 
should we not readjust ourselves in order 
to secure business which is available even 
in these days of depression? 

The versatility of the architect, which 
applies to every phase of building. is per- 
haps our outstanding characteristic. Yet 


by 
LIONEL L. LEBRAR 
Architect 


how very little effort we have made to es- 
tablish this fact in the public mind! Look- 
ing back some thirty years, it would seem 
that we had actually gone out of our way 
to convey the opposite impression. 

Early in this period architects were stick- 
ing pretty closely to their particular mut- 
tons. We had the architect who turned out 
apartment houses principally. The com- 
mercial architect who gave us our business 
architecture without leaving many examples 
for our inspiration. Our "monumental arch- 
itects" who were content with most of the 
important undertakings but sometimes con- 
descended to dabble in lesser work if it was 
sufficiently "de luxe." It remained for the 
"small architect," who was willing to tackle 
anything, to function with any degree of 
completeness. 

As we approach our own times, we find 
architects using their training and exper- 
ience with more intelligence. They apply it 
without discrimination to a wide diversity 
of building types. А service station, some 
"tax-payer'" or a chain of outdoor refresh- 
ment stands receives their attention and 
immediately it becomes a model for further 
accomplishment. Would they not serve the 
public and our profession more truly if they 
stood aside, as in the past, and left these 
humble tasks to less capable hands? 

While some minor work is done by arch- 
itects, a great part of it is not. For this 
we are largely responsible. Ап august 
group decides that an individual architect 
may be dispensed with for residences of 
six rooms or less and broadcasts the theory. 
Certainly that does not help promote the 
idea that an architect is necessary in every 
building activity. 


4 5 р 


We do not improve the situation either 
when we develop a minor operation into 
a major one, which often follows from our 
employment. This is what many an owner 
has in mind, rather than our insignificant 
fee, when he says, ‘I cannot afford an arch- 
itect. Only too frequently we consider a 
job an opportunity for ourselves instead of 
a chance to serve a client without perma- 
nent injury to his pocketbook. 

To understand the owner's point of view 
on this, we might consider our own rela- 
tions with our physician. We do not go 
to his office with a common cold and fear 
that, to show his skill or from other motives, 
he will build up a nice case of double pneu- 
monia, because doctors do not work along 
these lines. But we have no difficulty in 
recalling many building operations where 
money was spent far in excess of what the 
project really demanded. [п those instances 
the architect did far better for himself than 
for his client. 

This brings us directly to the point cov- 
ered by our heading. Is not our true field 
that of the building economist, who settles 
the vital matters of investment and return 
before going ahead? Unless we are willing 
to let the belief continue that an architect 
exists merely to "draw up blueprints" it 
would be wise for us to travel further in 
this direction than we have already gone. 

In illustration of this idea, let us turn 
again to another profession. When we con- 
sult our lawyer regarding our legal posi- 
tion in some matter we do not expect him 
to prepare a brief, but to tell us what we 
may or may not do. Likewise an architect 
proves his value without drawing a line 
when he advises a client on any building 
question. 

In either case a service has been ren- 
dered for which the client will pay. The 
objection may be offered that clients seldom 
do pay architects for advice. That is true 
but principally because it has been our cus- 
tom to furnish it gratis as a preliminary to 
making sketches. These, perhaps, will over- 
come the victim who may then be per- 
suaded to sign a contract or at least to pay 
for the drawings! 

Unfair as this procedure is to the client 
it is also unsound from the .architect's 
standpoint. Few sketches thus prepared 


are ever paid for since they may be alto- 
gether unnecessary. Had the building econ- 
omist instead of the architect been on the 
job. the sketch stage might never have been 
reached. А careful analysis of all the facts 
involved would have uncovered the ob- 
stacle which usually upsets propositions of 
this kind. 

As every architect knows, there is noth- 
ing quite so dead as a project indefinitely 
postponed unless it is the sketches which 
have been made for it. Consequently, how- 
ever reasonably we charge for them. we 
are asking payment for something which 
has no value. Advice, without sketches, 
would have cost our client much less and 
answered all requirements. 

The trained and experienced architect is 
particularly well fitted to advise. Unlike 
the contractor, manufacturer or material 
man, he is disinterested and impartial. 
Owners will naturally prefer to come to 
him for counsel when they understand that 
they may enter his office without setting 
wheels in motion which will grind out a 
“job” at their expense. 

Granted that there is much minor work 
to be done and that we architects can do it 
if we will revise our outlook somewhat, the 
question then arises, can we show a profit 
on this class of business? Unless it is profit- 
able it is not likely that we will care to con- 
tinue with it after times improve. And then, 
during the next period of depression, we 
shall find ourselves as much out of the pic- 
ture as at present. 

Minor work can be handled at a profit. 
We know that certain contractors maintain 
a jobbing department for small work which 
would otherwise clog up their organization. 
They find this small work not only profit- 
able, under such method of operation, but 
also that it frequently leads to larger 
things. 

Wee are reminded of a well-known arch- 
itect who was overheard telling a prospec- 
tive client that his $150,000 project was not 
large enough to interest his organization. 
This may sound wildly improbable at this 
time but it actually happened less than four 
years ago. 

Strangely enough, this large office did 
maintain what it termed “the bush league" 
for exactly this purpose but evidently it 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E. | 50 > JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


could operate only when a "job" bore the 
required number of ciphers. To complete 
the story, we might mention that this arch- 
itect is now in a far distant country at- 
tempting to "drum up” some business. 

А large part of the minor work referred 
to is, of course, residential. This also may 
be brought within our scope if we are will- 
ing to revise our methods in dealing with it. 

Much has been written and said both 
for and against the Architect's Small House 
Service Bureau. Perhaps the most telling 
indictment would be that it functions as a 
wholesaler who, by dealing directly with 
the consumer, puts the retailer, or the small 
architect, at a great disadvantage. More- 
over the experiment, however ‘noble in 
motive," has proved unprofitable. 

The contention that the small house 
builder will not or cannot pay the archi- 
tect's customary fee for complete architec- 
tural service is largely justified. Admitting 
this, we may then be able to suggest ап 
alternative which will allow architects to 
profit from the small house. 

We may admit further that the stock 
plans of the Bureau are all that is claimed 
for them. Also, that if a made-to-order 
plan is financially impossible then a ready- 
made one is the next best bet. The way is 
now cleared for a decidedly radical pro- 
posal. 

Would it not be advisable for the Bur- 
eau to discontinue dealing directly with the 


consumer but, instead, to relinquish this 
work to architects who desire this busi- 
ness? They, in turn, would select from the 
stock plans thus made available and. in 
addition, supply any necessary architec- 
tural service, all of which may be done 
profitably for a relatively small fee. Here 
is how it might work: 

Mr. Brown enters our office and, after 
raising our hopes by telling us that he 
wishes to engage our services for his mod- 
est dwelling. informs us that he cannot 
afford to pay our regular fee. We agree 
cheerfully and then explain what we are 
able to provide for the price he stipulates 
he can pay. This, naturally, would be less 
than our regular service and might be as 
follows: 

First, the selection of a stock plan which 
our experience indicates most nearly fits the 
requirements of his case. Then the choice 
ol a contractor and perhaps the drawing 
up of the contract, after our client has 
secured estimates from the stock plans and 
specifications which we furnish. Our sup- 
ervision we limit to the greatest number of 
visits the price will allow. The agreement 
with our client states clearly the extent of 
our responsibility in order to avoid argu- 
ment later. Certainly the result obtained 
under some such arrangement as this would 
be far better than if we had not been called 
in at all.—Architectural Record. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER 4 51 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


күт том 
ae 


Г. * COAST SUIVEY 


AD BACHUE Sgeerinteinsdeut 


2*9 re-na9 "mone 


CITY OF SAN FHANCISCO 

AND PES VICINITY 

а МАКА 
oumae al Nurri be B I CUTTS, Аш эзли 
phe be AP WODOKN Rub senstant 
Мучен аре br the Pany under tbe oaumaod of 
liest JANKE ALDEN TAN Амал 

Рызе im шы 


Male mhay 


wd 
Ze wire 


АЗ cam 
EI “са”. pm 
Ge» ox. 

2 


te E 
, жм 


ORIGINAL И. S. COAST SURVEY МАР OF SAN FRANCISCO, 1853 


Engineering 
and 


Building Construction 


СЕ 
Ff 


Subsidence and the 


Foundation Problem 


in San Francisco 
Г... BROWN, СЕ 
| 
^ 


Being extracts and comments of an intensive Report on the soil conditions т 


the Bay District, prepared by a committee of distinguished engineers, including 
the author, Hyde Forbes, L. H. Nishkian, Janes M. Owens and Frank G. White 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 53 > JANUARY. NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


АЗЫ 


l 


Сен ттоет? 


V Gennes SHORELINE 
US. Coesr Suever 
flee оғ 1855 


US CORST SURVET 
Лес of (95S 


Z0rr Geouno Cowrove LOST Jr 
б му 857 = ELEYRTION | f S 
же COT ZI Cr ny I E AES 


4 POrr Geouno Соутоия 
72 v [BIS ELEVATION 
8.337 Orr BAE 


Geaer Sr 
EE 


ШІ 


Cra roe 


BAL ANYAD 


С 


у 
N 


ІШІ 
= 


ы 
(5) 


US Coasr Sveveyr 
flap of 1859 


20” Grouno Соттосе 
i 1859 " ELEVRTION 
8337 Ст, Base 


2 pe 
\ 
E 
4 El ES 
9 ef ORGINAL Woretine 
51 US Coesr Suever SuTree 
> Пер оғ 1853 fu 
20ғ” Qqeovwo CONTOUR 
ж "S ELEVATION ит SE 
6337 Grr Base ef 
27 


SICH (926 то OCTOBER LIEI OCTOBER РР ro SEPTEMBER «976 


CONTOURS 
SHOWING ANNUAL RATE OF SUBSIDENCE 


for INDICATED PERIODS OF TIME ИУ THE ИСМУ OF BUSH AND SANSOVIE SIS 


CONTOUR 2угсеуее = OFT Феселесе SIH 


PLATE I 


SUBSIDENCE AND THE FOUNDATION PROB- 
LEM IN SAN FRANCISCO 


HE present tendency 
in American City development is to con- 
centrate building loads on small areas by 
the extension of buildings upwards, replac- 
ing existing substructure loads by yet 
greater ones. Thus foundation construc- 
tion is of major engineering importance in 
all large cities, with the probable further 
continuation of this trend, producing addi- 
tional problems during each decade. The 
only unchanging factor in such engineering 
problems in any given locality is the char- 
acter of the foundation material. 


Professor Terzaghi, who undoubtedly 
has given more thought and time toward 
the advancement of the Science of Founda- 
tions than any other person in recent years, 
was forced to the conclusion that “founda- 
tion problems, throughout, are of such 
character that a strictly mathematical treat- 
ment will always be impossible. The only 
way to handle them efficiently consists in 
finding out, first, what has happened on 
preceding jobs of a similar character, next, 
the kind of soil on which the operations 
were performed; and finally, why the oper- 
ations have led to certain results." Natural 
materials, used as foundations for engi- 
neering structures, do not have the uni- 
form, readily determined characteristics of 
those used as a base for the development 
of the laws of the theory of elasticity and 


*Proccedings Am. Soc. C. E, Nov. 1927. 


ЖА Report of the Subsoil Committee of the American Society of Civil 
Engineers published September, 1932. 


by 
A A BROWN C. B 


other laws or rules in general use by engi- 
neers. [t is therefore, quite impossible to 
apply general formulae to natural sub- 
stance which, like foundation materials, 
may have varying contents of moisture and 
which may act, even within certain narrow- 
ly defined types, with considerable vari- 
ance under load due to the continuous ap- 
plication of stress during the passage of 
time. 


It is due to the existing and complicated 
combination of foundation materials that 
there exists over large areas of the business 
district of San Francisco the problem of 
subsidence. Recognizing the existence of 
this problem the San Francisco Section of 
the American Society of Civil Engineers 
appointed a committee consisting of Hyde 
Forbes, L. H. Nishkian, James M. Owens, 
Frank G. White, and the writer as chair- 
man, to investigate the phenomenon of sub- 
sidence.t As a result of many varied fac- 
tors, discussed at some length in the report, 
subsidence is irregular both as to rate and 
locality. This is illustrated clearly by Plate 
I which shows the variation in the annual 
rate of subsidence for certain indicated 
periods of time. 


Editors Note—Archibald Alexander Brown, chairman of the Committee 
of Engineers who prepared the soil report, after completing his college 
course in 1906, successively was employed by the Santa Fe and Southern 
Pacific Railroads; Assistant Engineer, City and County of San Francisco; 
Assistant Engineer, Board of State Harbor Commissioners, San Francisco; 
Assistant Chief Structural Engineer, Panama-Pacific International Expo- 
sition; Assistant Chief Engineer, Board of State Harbor Commissioners; 
engineer in charge of construction for the California and Hawaiian Sugar 
Refining Corporation, on works costing more than $10.000,000.00. 

Since 1921 Mr. Brown has been consulting engineer, representing the 
California and Hawaiian Sugar Refining Corporation, Limited, and Mat- 
son Navigation Company, in construction. of the Matson Building, Mat- 
son Terminal, etc. In 1922 Mr. Brown was appointed chairman of a 
committee of A.S.C.E. to investigate and report on “Foundation Prob- 
lems in the Filled-in Area of San Francisco." Again in 1929 he was 
made chairman of the Subsoil Committee of the A.S.C.E. to investigate 
“Subsidence and the Foundation Problem." 


4 > р 


OF THE 


Cilp and County of 


(CISCO 


SHOWING 


A SAN 


SUBSOIL CLASSIFICATION 
WATER FRONT MATERIALS 


DEC.1,1931 


ММ 


а 
сему 


Г 


Swane 
Por RIALS 


4 
N 


= PE 7 быз Ü 
0% ; 4 


и... е, 
Фо 


2) А 


BSS 


a 


CSREES 


кане ДҮ МЕГЕ 


Lv 


үу 


9 
e 


1 
y 


ӘТЕШ; 555 


<) 


bu 
ШШ 


РА 


PLATE II 


Nor is the problem restricted to the 
filled-in area of San Francisco—it occurs 
all around the bay region. For example, in 
Oakland in the neighborhood of Lake Mer- 
ritt and where the Oakland Auditorium 
sits, there are proceeding lateral movements 
of no small magnitude, coupled with verti- 
cal movements. That building rests on long 
piles, but is settling very decidedly. The 
entire region south of Lake Merritt and 
between Lake Merritt and the Estuary is 
not only settling but is moving horizontally 
in different directions. Thus the problem of 
subsidence is one vitally affecting all build- 
ing activities in the San Francisco Bay area. 

Discussing the geologic conditions in the 
City of San Francisco the report, in part, 
says: “Зап Francisco presents a variety of 
foundation conditions with which the engi- 
neer must cope. The original topography 
of the site did not lend itself readily to 
metropolitan development, having but little 
area available for buildings, so man im- 
proved upon nature in so far as providing 
building surface is concerned. But subsur- 
race conditions are still in their natural 
state, covered over wide-spread areas with 
a manlaid veneer.— (see Plate II). 

"It is possible to roughly classify accord- 
ing to their physical characteristics, natural 
materials existent as foundations in San 
Francisco, which classification when cor- 
related to the accurate measurements of 
settlement and displacement of structures 
thereon, will give some basis for conclu- 
sions as to deformation to which each type 
of foundation material is subjected with 
time. To show more readily the subsur- 
face conditions a probable contour map of 
the bedrock was prepared (See Plate 
III. It was found that the rugged sur- 
face of the peninsula is greatly accentuated 
at depths below the surface by a pro- 
nounced canyon underlying the central 
business district of San Francisco. bed- 
rock dipping from the continuation of Rus- 
sian Hill slope to a depth of 290 feet below 
City Base south of Mission Street and 
thence rising to the slope of Rincon Hill. 

"The region long has been one of seismic 
activity and was depressed with the bay 
area. allowing the encroachment of the sea, 
which deposited a body of marine clays in 


the main topographic canyon and coves.— 
Large areas were covered by windblown 
sands, originating principally from the 
ocean beach.—A sand ridge was built up 
from Rincon Hill to Telegraph Hill, block- 
ing the surface drainage and forming a 
swamp in the Mission District.—Thus ac- 
cumulations of materials overlying the bed- 
rock are found to consist in part of marine 
clays of considerable thickness and inter- 
bedded with alluvial deposits and dune 
sand. The dune sands are modified by the 
inclusion of clay and a content of vegetable 
matter into a somewhat indurated sandy 
clay where the sands drifted from the west 
into tide water. They are modified to the 
extent to which surface drainage assorted 
them and rendered them aluvial in charac- 
ter in the lower portions of valleys, and are 
further modified by vegetation into peat 
bogs where surface and subsurface drain- 
age maintained swamp conditions. 

“The filling of the bogs was accomp- 
lished largely by dumping in sand which 
sank out of sight, displaced the mud and 
caused it to deform, move away laterally, 
and upheave. The result was the develop- 
ment of a thicker crust to the bog. This 
crust consisted in part of bodies of sand. 
sand mixed with mud, and the dried-out 
bog mud, the weight of which probably 
caused some drainage and stabilization of 
the material underlying but which still may 
be considered as having semi-liquid prop- 
erties. 

“The result of these modifications has 
been to produce over the original irregular 
sandy areas more or less level building 
space, completely, obliterating the old 
drainage lines. Beneath these areas por- 
tions of the pre-existing valleys now act as 
underground drainage channels for the 
considerable volumes of water falling on 
the watershed area. In general these ип4ег- 
ground systems terminate in the now соу- 
ered old swamp and pond areas, there 
keeping the subsurface material in a sat- 
urated condition through subsurface drain- 
age. Bordering this area and extending 
bayward from the original shore line lies a 
wide area of marine clay and marsh con- 
taining a great number of wooden piles and 
overlaid by a miscellany of sand, rock, 
wood, and rubbish. Consequently, the en- 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER i 57 e JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


OF THE 
(itp and County of 


Е ED 


=: % 
25 


FRANCISCO 
SHOWING 
к BED Воск CONTOURS 


N 


3% 
- 5A 


Dec 1.1931 


A. 


Areas of reed oufcrap 
Approximate Contours 
ef Bedraen 


PLATE IH 


gineers problem in San Francisco is not 
limited to excavation and spoil disposition 
as in many cities, but is far more compli- 
cated because: (1) rock lies far below the 
surface of the greater portion of the build- 
ing space; (2) ground water may or may 
not be found in detrimental amounts or 
under pressure; and (3) plastic clays are 
covered by fills of unknown but heterogen- 
eous character." 

The report goes on to discuss the var- 
ious types of foundations in use within the 
area under consideration and presents in 
the appendix information concerning a 
number of important structures, together 
with the record of subsidence. It is pointed 
out that in driving piles, the same soil 
strata should be reached to avoid unequal 
settlement. "In driving piles in the filled-in 
areas, a firm stratum must positively be 
reached to avoid subsidence.— To depend 
upon skin friction in the subsiding area is 
disadvantageous because the soil serves to 
help pull the structure down as it settles." 

The record is given of one important 
structure where the average length of piles 
below cut-off was 111.5 feet under the high 
portion of the building and 81.4 feet below 
cut-off in the 2-story and sidewalk areas, 
with the result that serious subsidence has 
occurred where the short piling was used 
while the more important area of the struc- 
ture has subsided very little. It is true that 
a pile 81 feet long will, by skin friction, 
support a very heavy load but the adhesion 
of the subsiding soil, in time becomes a lia- 
bility instead of an asset. The recorded 
experience indicates that within subsiding 
areas foundations for important structures 
can be successfully constructed by exercis- 
ing care; it is, however, no job for an ama- 
teur engineer. 

Ground water conditions are important 
where wood piling or timber rafts are used. 
Dry wood will not decay. Wood is food 
material for fungi, but they cannot use the 
food unless it contains at least 15 to 20 per 
cent of its weight in water. On the other 
hand, fungi cannot use the food when water 
is present in excess, that is, when the wood 
is thoroughly soaked through or is sub- 
merged in water. This refers, of course, 
not only to the present ground water table 
but any possible future lowering. ln a 


growing city the increase in drainage, 
deeper foundations, pumping of wells, and 
a reduced area subject to direct rainfall 
(due to building and street-work) all tend 
to lower the ground water level. In one 
place during excavation for a new building 
next to a three-story brick building 
resting on wood piling. it was found that 
the water table had receded some distance 
below the top of the wood piles, resulting 
in a bad case of dry-rot. In other places 
buildings erected on timber rafts have been 
subject to dry-rot due to a receding water 
table, resulting in expensive reconstruction. 

The report contains the logs of some 259 
test holes distributed over a wide area. 
— (аз shown on Plae IV ). 

“Тһе importance of thorough subsurface 
exploration and bearing tests cannot be 
over-emphasized. However, the value of 
test borings depends almost entirely on the 
experience and judgment of the man who 
examines the material and interprets the 
results. "Therefore, well drilling is of most 
value when it is directed by the persons 
charged with the determination of the bear- 
ing value of the subsoil. Frequent stops 
should be made to permit the water level 
to stabilize, noting with especial care the 
location of each change of material, the 
horizon at which water enters or is lost, etc. 
The wells should be kept open for a suffi- 
cient length of time to allow such water 
level observations to be made as may be 
required to establish the relation of fluctua- 
tions in water levels with respect to rain- 
fall and seasonal ground-water content. 

"In considering the load-bearing ability 
of foundation material, the application of 
general rules to driller's interpretation of 
materials is a precarious method. One 
should know the material considered, its 
general compactness, its ability to resist 
flowage or creep, and its other physical 
characteristics. This means that one should 
be familiar with the behavior, through ex- 
perience or training, of the various kinds 
of material which make up the outer crust 
of the earth, under varying natural condi- 
tions encountered and under artificial load- 
ing. 
“The sole purpose of the foundation is 
to take the load of the superstructure and 
so reduce it that the supporting medium, 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 59 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


«itp and County of 
OF 
TA WELL BORINGS 


5162 \.5 ED 
SAN ERANCISCO 


SHOWING LOCATION 


ед 89 626969 6 


(0G G0 (9 Q0 @ €) @@ О ОВ 


DEC.1, 1931 


RER 


= 


УА 


23 


552 


LOT УЧ! 


y, 


Н 
NT. 
OFT) 


іші 


ЫП 
TN 


= 


2 


и 


ы ИВ UY т 

д 
605 
LAC 


27 
2 7) 


та 
7 


7 


E 


(® ® @ @ ® ® ® ® 


De 7-3332: _ 


PLATE I\ 


namely the soil, may safely carry the weight 
without serious subsidence. Unequal settle- 
ment in an important structure presents 
many complex and difficult problems. Ип- 
sightly cracks and the necessity for fre- 
quent realignment of elevator guides, while 
annoying and some times costly, are of 
little moment as compared with the diffi- 
culties attendant upon a building settling 
out of plumb and leaning several inches 
onto the adjoining property. 


In reporting for a financial institution in 
San Francisco, I found the top of a build- 
ing leaning onto the adjoining property 
415” and one year later settlement had 


PERSPECTIVE, STATE HOSPITAL FOR THE INSANE, CAMARILLO, VENTURA COUNTY. 
Designed by Division of Architecture, California State Department of Public Works 


caused it to increase to 514”. Another struc- 
ture belonging to this bank was leaning 
716” over their property line. Where the 
potential possibilities for litigation and con- 
sequent costly court action threaten, the 
foundation problem in this complex area 
assumes a position of major importance to 
all prospective building owners. Lack of 
understanding of this problem of subsi- 
dence and its relation to proper methods of 
foundation design and construction is a 
large contributing factor where difficulties 
have arisen in the past. The report of the 
Sub-soil Committee of the American Soci- 
ety is a record of past experience together 
with a discussion of the problems involved. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 61 p JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


ES 
~ 
~ 
— 
~~ 
— 
= 
m 
— 
tt 


A CHARMING BIT OF MEDITERRANEAN ARCHITECTURE 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER а 62 > JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


COMPETITION FOR DESIGN FOR A SPRING 


GARDEN SHOW 


OME twenty contest- 
ants participated in the Annual Spring 
Garden Show Competition which closed in 
Oakland, January 15th and the drawings 
are now before the judges for awards. Ап 
exceptionally well thought out program 
was prepared under the direction of Pro- 
fessor J. W. Gregg of the University of 
California and it has been suggested that 
the arrangement of this program might be 
followed to good advantage by the archi- 
tectural profession for their competitions. 
Because of this fact and the unusual inter- 
est that has been shown in this competition 
the program is published here in full: 


Competition 

An organization known as The Spring Garden Show, Inc., 
a non-profit corporation, has for several years been holding 
in Oakland, California, a garden and flower exhibition. These 
exhibitions have attracted state-wide attention because of 
the high artistic merit which has been the result of their 
being developed around one controlling landscape or garden 
motif. lt is the desire of the sponsors to maintain the al- 
ready high standard of excellence in general design and 
composition of the exhibition as a whole. Ín order to assist 
in accomplishing such results, they propose to inaugurate 
a competition for designs for the 1933 exhibition. 

The competition will be under the direction of Professor 
]. W. Gregg, member of the American Society of Landscape 
Architects, who has been appointed professional advisor, 
and will be conducted in compliance with the rules and reg- 
ulations of the American Society of Landscape Architects 
with the immediate sanction of the northern section of the 
Pacific Coast Chapter. 

Competitors 

This competition is open to technically-trained profes- 
sional landscape architects, landscape draftsmen and stu- 
dents of landscape architecture who are residents of the 
State of California. 

Compensation to Competitors 

The sponsors of the competition agree to pay the winner 

immediately after the judgment of the jury the following: 


For Ist Prize Design . $150.00 
For 2nd Prize Design А 75.00 
For 3rd Prize Design. . . 50.00 


There will also be а Ist Honorable Mention, for which 
no cash award will be made. 
Jury of Award 

1. Frederick Noble Evans, Fellow of the American Soci- 
ety of Landscape Architects, Landscape Architect for 
the City of Sacramento, California. 

2. Thomas Vint, Member of the American Society of 
Landscape Architects, Chief Landscape Engineer, Ма- 
tional Park Service, San Francisco. 

3. Howard Gilkey, Member of the American Society of 
Landscape Architects, Oakland, California. 

4. L. Deming Tilton, Member of the American Society 
of Landscape Architects, Director of Planning, Santa 
Barbara, California. 

5. George Budgen, Nurseryman, Berkeley, California. 


'The Spring Garden Show, 1nc., and the competitors agree 
that the jury has authority to make the award and that its 
decision shall be final. 


THE COMPETITION 
The Problem—Mandatory 

The design of “А Spring Garden Show” which shall con- 
sist of drawings made to scale showing the complete use of 
the floor and wall space of the Exposition Building and con- 
forming to the following requirements: 

1. ТІМЕ—Оаќеѕ of Show, April 21 to 23rd, inc. 

2. COST—Complete installation of the construction work 
and decorative features of the plan, exclusive of the exhibi- 
tors' costs, shal! not exceed $3500.00. 1n this total must be 
included sods, cut greens, etc., furnished by the Show. 

3. WALKS--Provision must be made for the comfort- 
able assembling of 5000 persons at a given time. An aver- 
age width of walks of twelve feet is suggested as a working 
basis. Exigencies of design may cause the reduction of this 
width, but in no case shall any walk used for general cir- 
culation be less than ten feet in width. 

4. STYLE—One of the purposes of the Spring Garden 
Show is the presentation to the public of correct standards 
of garden design and construction, With this motive in mind 
the design of the whole Show should be uniform in style. 
Last year's Show was of a highly formal Moorish-Spanish 
design. lt is the desire of the Board of Directors to deviate 
as much as possible from such effects. More informality, 
less structural features and less expensive details are sug- 
gested. 


5. EXHIBIT SPACES—In general, the Show is divided 
into the following main sections: 
(A) Main garden ensemble, including walks and features, 
shall occupy approximately 32,500 sq. ft. 
Provision is to be made for 10 large nursery exhibits 
24^ in depth, approximate total net 7500 sq. ft. 
Areas of beds for greenhouse potted plants, pansies, 
a irises (all rich in color) approximately 5000 
sq. ft. 
Six large model garden exhibits by Clubs approxi- 
mately 4500 sq. ft. 
Incidental smaller plots for specialists and small nurs- 
pr amateur flower beds, etc., approximately 3000 
54. It. 
Commercial Cut Flowers. 
Five spaces for commercial cut flower growers. 
Eight spaces for retail florists, preferablv separated 
from each other, approximately 3000 sq. ft. 


Amateur cut flowers— novice class, approximately 


2000 sq. ft. 


Amateur cut flowers—arrangement and Garden Club 
ensemble displays, approximately 3000 sq. ft. 


Tad section—garden supplies and accessories 8000 
sq. ft. 

Unallotted—approximately 4000 sq. ft. 

Total Building Space 52,500 sq. ft. 

6. THE SITE. 

'The entire floor area and walls of the Exposition Build- 
ing, located at 10th and Fallon Streets, Oakland, California. 
as shown on the plan and elevations, is made the basis of 
the competition. The floor of the Exposition Building is of 
earth and may therefore be used with some freedom as re- 
gards breaking into its ground surface where necessary. 
(Permission can be obtained to visit the site.) 


7. PRESENTATION OF DRAWINGS—Mandatory. 
The drawings shall be submitted in the following manner: 
(a) Complete plot plan of floor area showing general gar- 
den scheme, walks, exhibit spaces and features, drawn 

at a scale of ith inch equals one foot, with longitud- 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER {| 63 № JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


inal and cross-sections on same sheet at the same scale. 

(b) А bird's-eyc-view freehand perspective of the general 
plan from best vantage point. Included on this draw- 
ing may be onc or more detailed sketches in elevation 
or perspective as may be necessary to show the scheme 
and help to estimate costs. 

(c) An estimate of cost is to be included on the general 

lan. 

(d) Drawing: shall be made in full black ink, in pencil or 
crayon on white illustrator's board. Diluted ink, color 
or wash is prohibited. 

(e) Each sheet is to be exactly 14"x28", with single black 
border lines drawn to frame interior space 1212"x2615". 
Graphic scale must be shown. Each sheet shall bear 
the title "Design for The Spring Garden Show, Іпс., 
submitted in Competition." 

(f) Each sheet shall be signed by a nom de plume. 

Materials to be used shall be designated either on the plan 
or by symbols and legend. Such information shall be suffi- 
ciently definite to allow the making of preliminary estimates 
of cost, example: "board edging’, “sod”, brick pavement". 

No specification need be made of width of boards, kind of 

brick, etc. 

Consideration of Jury of Award 

Artistic merit of the entire design. 

Excellence and ingenuity of the design. 

Practicability and simplicity of construction. 

Fitness and economy of design as a whole to meet the 

needs and spirit of the problem. Too costly a design 

will lower its rating. 

5. Adaptability to season. (Third weck in April.) 

Communications—M andator y 

Contestants shall not communicate on the subject of this 
competition with the professional advisor, members of the 
jury, or with any other person in any way connected with 
it either directly or indirectly. 

Anonymity of Drawings—Mandatory 

The drawings submitted shall show no distinguishing mark 
except the nom de plume, which serves as a means of ident- 
ification. Every set of plans submitted shall be accompanied 
by a sealed envelope bearing on the outside only the words 

“This envelope contains the true name and address of the 

competitor whose nom de plume is ........................... ч 

These envelopes will be retained unopened by the pro- 
fessional advisor until the jury has completed its award. 

No competitor shall directly or indirectly reveal his or her 

identity to а member of the jury or to the professional 

advisor. 


wh 


Delivery of Drawings—Mandatory 

The drawings submitted in this competition shall be se- 
curely wrapped flat and addressed in plain lettering to The 
Spring Garden Show, Inc., c/o Mr. Abe P. Leach, Tribune 
Tower, Oakland, California. The return address required 
by postal or express regulations must not be the name and 
address of the competitor, members of his family or his 
partner, but of a person who could be notified by the trans- 
port agent in case of non-delivery. Drawings shall be de- 
livered not later than 5:00 o'clock on January 15, 1933. 
Drawings submitted are at the competitor's risk. Reasonable 
care, however, will be exercised in handling, and storing all 
drawings. Drawings not receiving prizes will be returned 
upon request of competitor. 

Examination of Designs 

The professional advisor will examine the designs and 
records of their receipt to ascertain whether they comply 
with the mandatory requirements of the program and will 
report to the jury any instances of failure. The jury will 
satisfy itself of the accuracy of the report and will place 
out of competition and make no award to any design not 
complying with the mandatory requirements. 

Announcement of Award 

The professional advisor will send by mail the names of 
the winners of the prizes to each competitor as soon аз роз- 
sible after the awards are made, and the envelopes have 
been opened. 

Ownership and Usc of Designs 

All prize designs become the property of The Spring 

Garden Show, Inc., and the Association reserves the right 


to use, publish or show in any way beneficial to the Asso- 
ciation. 


BOOK REVIEWS 
By ©dgar MT” Kerul! f 


PLANNING AND BUILDING THE CITY 
OF WASHINGTON-—Edited by Frederick 
Haynes Donald. Published by The Wash- 
ington Society of Engineers, 810 Rhode 
Island Avenue М. E., Washington, D. C. 
Price $2.00. 

A most interesting book prepared by a group 
of engineers and architects who thoroughly know 
Washington and have aided in the designing and 
laying out of the city. 

By carefully arranged and chosen photographs, 
the book is illustrated in a manner that materially 
enhances its value as a document recording the 
progress of planning and beautifying the capitol 
of the nation. There are eighty-two halftones, 
eight maps and five charts and appendix and in- 
dex, with two hundred and forty-five pages of 
reading matter exclusive of the introduction. 


AIRPORTS—Their location, administration and 
legal basis, by Henry V. Hubbard, Miller 
McClintock and Frank B. Williams, assisted 
by Paul McHoney and Howard K. Menhi- 
nick. Published by the Harvard City Plan- 
ning Studies, Vol. I, Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge, Mass. Price $3.50. 

This volume comprises three reports made after 

a careful survey of eighty-five airports in thirty- 
two states, with a thoughtful analysis of the data 
so obtained in which the co-operation of many 
airport officials and well informed persons has 
been incorporated. The contents includes Chap- 
ters on administration, fiscal policy, management. 
physical characteristics, etc. There is an elaborate 
appendix with statistical tables. 


TOWN AND COUNTRYSIDE — Some As- 
pects of Urban and Rural Development—By 
Thomas Sharp. Published by the Oxford 
University Press, 114 Fifth Avenue, New 
York City. Price $4.50. 

A plea for the countryside to be permitted to 
remain rural and for towns to remain towns and 
to discontinue the degradation and annihilation of 
both. Upon this point, the author has based his 
argument and this book details that argument, in 
a manner intensely interesting, with a certain pro- 
vocativeness and charm that renders it quite dif- 
ferent. 


[Concluded on Page 77] 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 64 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


« « « « With the Architects » » » » 


OAKLAND PARK DEVELOPMENT 
The Oakland Playground Commission has ар- 
proved a general plan submitted by Engineers 
lluffey and Belcher for the development of the 
recently acquired Davie Park. While no funds 
are available at this time it is thought that suffi- 
cient money for grading the property may be ob- 
tained from the $3.000,000 relief bonds, voted a 
short time ago. This would give employment to 
quite a few. Later on, the Park will be further 
developed by the construction of a swimming pool, 

bath houses. open air theater, and bleachers. 


FRESNO AUDITORIUM 

Preliminary plans have been prepared by 
Charles H. Franklin, Patterson Building. Fresno, 
lor remodeling the exterior and interior of the 
Municipal Auditorium at L and Kern Streets, 
Fresno. The building covers a ground area of 
175x150 feet and Mr. Franklin's plans call for 
complete modernization in addition to construc- 
tion of a balcony which will materially increase 
the seating capacity. À bond election to take care 
of the estimated cost of $175,000 is contemplated. 


ARCHITECTS BUSY 

The firm of Masten © Hurd, 233 Post Street, 
San Francisco, has been quite busy since the 
first of the year, having been commissioned to pre- 
pare plans for a number of oil stations for the 
Associated Oil Company, in addition to some resi- 
dence work. 'The firm has recently awarded a 
contract for a new home in St. Francis Wood 
for Ralph А. Head at a cost of $6193. Mr. Hurd, 
member of this firm, has lately returned from a 
trip to New York. 


BUNGALOW TYPE QUARTERS 

Plans have been completed by the Construct- 
ing Quartermaster at Fort Mason, San Francisco, 
for eleven officers’ dwellings of the bungalow type 
to be constructed at Hamilton Field. Marin Mead- 
ows, California, in connection with the bombing 
base there. Bids will be opened early in Febru- 
ary. All of the houses will be of hollow tile. the 
group representing a probable outlay of $150,000. 


FORD COMPANY SUED 

The Ford Motor Company, Delaware corpora- 
tion, has been sued for $68,093 by the Clinton 
Construction Company of San Francisco, which 
alleged refusal to pay a balance due on the con- 
tract for construction of the Ford assembly plant 
in Richmond. 

The complaint, filed in Federal court, said the 
Clinton Company completed its part of the con- 
tract September 17, 1931, and that the Ford Com- 
pany had "consistently" failed to complete pay- 
ment, 


BERKELEY AUTO DISPLAY BUILDING 

А one story frame and brick veneer auto dis- 
play building is to be erected on the southeast 
corner of Couper Street and San Pablo Avenue, 
Berkeley, for the Berkeley Auto Wrecking Com- 
pany. The owner is Mary C. Nordyke and the 
architect is Guy L. Brown, American Bank Build- 
ing, Oakland. 


TWO OAKLAND RESIDENCES 
Preliminary plans have been prepared by Leon- 
ard А. Ford, architect of Oakland, for two dwell- 
ings, one a Spanish house to be built in St. James 
Wood, and the other an English residence in 
Oakmore Highlands. 


BURLINGAME RESIDENCE 
А contract has been awarded to G. P. W. Jen- 
sen, 320 Market Street, San Francisco, to build 
a stucco residence in Burlingame for Dr. S. Pope, 
from plans by W. W. Wurster, architect, 260 
California Street, San Francisco. 


RESIDENCE ADDITION 
А. А. Cantin, 557 Market Street, San Fran- 


cisco, has completed drawings for a two story 
frame and stucco addition to the Seacliff home of 
C. W. Burkett, estimated to cost $4500. 


PRIVATE STABLES 
Gardner А. Dailey, 210 Post Street, San Fran- 
cisco, has prepared plans for stables and garage 
at the Woodside Estate of George Whittell, Jr. 


Construction will be frame and brick veneer. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E! 65 » JANUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


LODGE BUILDINGS 

The Oroville Aerie, Fraternal Order of Eagles, 
will build a $15,000 hall and lodge home. 

The Vallejo Lodge of Elks plan to erect a new 
home next spring to replace their old building, 
recently destroyed by fire. 

Woodmen of the World at Fresno will replace 
their home, recently destroyed by fire, with a 
new structure at an early date. 


REMODEL OAKLAND BUILDING 

Extensive remodeling to the two story Class C 
building on Broadway, adjoining the Capwell 
Store, Oakland, formerly leased as a dance hall, 
is planned by the owners, the Twentieth and 
Broadway Realty Company. The work will be 
handled by Wilbur C. Cone under the direction 
of the architect, Albert J. Evers. Earl Cope is the 
engineer. 


PALO ALTO ARCHITECT BUSY 

Birge M. Clark, 310 University Avenue, Palo 
Alto, has recently completed drawings for a con- 
crete mausoleum and columbarium to be erected 
near Palo Alto for the Alta Mesa Cemetery Asso- 
ciation; also, a one story Class C store building 
in Palo Alto and a community theater and audi- 
torium in the same city. 


REMODEL GARAGE 
Sam Heiman, architect, 605 Market Street, San 
Francisco, is preparing plans for alterations to 
the garage and auto sales building on Sir Francis 
Drake Boulevard, San Anselmo, owned by C. O. 
Durham. It is planned to convert the garage into 
a dance hail. 


HILLSBOROUGH RESIDENCE 
Plans have been completed in the office of Willis 
Polk & Company, 277 Pine Street, San Francisco, 
for a $12,000 residence designed in the Spanish 
Colonial style and to be built in Hayden Road, 
Hillsborough, for Hugh L. Clary of 716 Crescent 
Avenue, San Mateo. 


TWO STUCCO DWELLINGS 
The Clausen Architectural Studios, 746-46th 
Avenue, San Francisco, have prepared drawings 
for Kenneth Evers who will build four two-story, 
frame and stucco dwellings on Quintara Street, 
between 18th and 19th Avenues, San Francisco, 
at an estimated cost of $5200 each. 


MODESTO MARKET 
A one story Class C drive-in market will be 
built at 9th and H Streets, Modesto, for М. Е. 
Angelo from plans prepared by George M. Hil- 
burn, architect of Modesto. 


66 


CALIFORNIA STATE BOARD OF 
ARCHITECTURAL EXAMINERS 


ALBERT J. Evers, President San Francisco 


A. M. EDELMAN, Vice-President . Los Angeles 
Н. C. CHAMBERs, Secretary . : Los Angeles 
С. J. Вуглюо, Assistant — о Monterey 
JOHN C. AusriN . х Los Angeles 
Louis J. Опт. San Diego 


. San Francisco 
San Francisco 

Los Angeles 

San Francisco 
Advisory Engineer 


Henry Н. GurTTERSON . 
Freperick Н. MEYER 
JOHN PARKINSON . 
Warren C. PERRY 
Влумомо W. JEANS 


FEBRUARY EVENTS 

February 1—-Closing date for entries in com- 
petitions for fellowships at the American Academy 
in Rome. Address Roscoe Guernsey, Executive 
Secretary, American Academy in Rome, 101 Park 
Avenue, New York City. 

February 23-25— Eleventh annual North Amer- 
ican Conference on Church Architecture at the 
Stevens Hotel, Chicago. An exhibit of ecclesiasti- 
cal architecture will be held under auspices of the 
"Christian Herald." ' 

April 23-30—Better Homes week, an educa- 
tional movement under auspices of Better Homes 
in America, 1653 Pennsylvania Avenue, Wash- 
ington, D. C. Demonstrations of new and remod- 
eled houses, lectures, contests, etc., are urged. 

June—' А Century of Progress,” International 
Exposition at Chicago. 


LICENSE FEE REDUCED 

At the special meeting of the California Board 
of Architectural Examiners, on December 17, the 
annual license fee of California architects was re- 
duced from $10.00 per year to $6.00 per year, 
for the current year. 

At the regular meeting of the Board on No- 
vember 29, the following candidate was granted 
a Provisional Certificate to practice architecture 
in the State of California: Carl Frederick Gromme, 
3469 Jackson Street, San Francisco, California. 


SAN FRANCISCO RESIDENCE 
Richard R. Irvine, 2048 Market Street, San 
Francisco, is preparing plans for a two story, 
frame and stucco Spanish style residence to be 
built in the Marina District, San Francisco, for 
Ben Liebman of 1555 Francisco Street. 


BERKELEY RESIDENCE WORK 
New work in the office of Edwin L. Snyder, 
2101 Addison Street, Berkeley, includes an Eng- 
lish home for Rev. Roger Peters; a house on Crag- 
mont Avenue for C. Walker and a house in North 
Cragmont for Dr. George Oulton. 


PASADENA POST OFFICE 
Marsten and Maybury, 25 South Euclid Ave- 
nue, Pasadena, have been commissioned to pre- 
pare plans for a $300,000 addition to the Pasa- 
dena Post Office building. 


The Architect and Engineer, January, 1933 


А 
PNiaddanwileating Corp. 9 91 
тое хое CO. ............................—...-. 86 
mercan Rolling Mill .................................... 87 
Anderson and RINgrOSe aeee 92 
N O САНА 90 
B 
Doss cutersbaint Фо Back Cover 
Блез Carpenter боа 91 
Бтасн О Сере (бо Қа... 90 
Brown Hardwood Co., Су. H. - 83 
C 
(АБО Iiae erona se 83 
Californias shade Cloth Co., Inc. 2... 83 
(Cid GP М. 7 
Clervi Marble & Mosaic Co. ............................ 89 
Clinton Construction Со. ..............................-. 85 
oak Marble Co, Ба... 87 
Сене. ЕО Ec c E 82 
(Clone Clana yogis ie ооо ее ее 88 
(Стае ац Ре НЕ 81 
р 
Davey КЕР Surgery Co., Ка. Ңұ( 2 
Detroit Steel Products Бо 91 
Ше оз во es i 86 
Dickey Шау Mic. Co, W, Saee een 86 
Dinwiddie Construction Со. ........................... 92 
Е 
Igigls Schindler CO. c 89 
Forderer Cornice Works ..............-.--......——-—.—-. 88 
а 91 
С 
Garnett Young & Company ............................ 88 
(Селе ТЕН 90 
ата Bros: Mfg, Со. ee 86 
(Claddines McBean б. 8 
Golden Gate Atlas Materials Со. .................... . 87 
(Genet, ЛЫ... 5 
Grinnell Company of the Pacific 2... 87 
(ооу Cornice Works e 86 
Gunn, Carle & Company ............................ 83 
H 
Haws Sanitary Drinking Faucet Co. ............... 81 
[Чип (Сә, Robert МУ. E — 88 
Pinnas S oireann aa s 89 
J 
Jerem (Qu JP ласа 90 
lleunsenlcuBbedersene 2 eee 82 
Jews Ou ы ЛЕ... 92 
Порто Senice Со 3 
Јо, 2а (ба 3 84 
К 
Бара т а 82 
сетер Boiler богро 86 
ПКЕ” Mig (бо... 85 
L 
Laren I Arsen ree 88 
ИСАК ега Mig. бо 92 
Шекер, ll. jl EROS 85 
Папастеп с охіпегсоп Inc, 2 80 


Phe Architect and Engincer. January, 1933 


Index to Advertising Announcements 


For Classified List of Advertisers see Pages 93, 94, 95 


* Appears alternate months 


M 
асо тта а Е Тото кока 92 
Мае тегс Он 84 
Ме@ ише Мата Co E 87 
MeNear ае Co. ЛЕП 90 
елеу рев сс EO 87 
Mueller Фо rc MEME 84 
Mullen Manufacturing Co. ee 90 
Musto Sons Keenan Co., Joseph ...................... 86 
М 
National Lead Company ...................... Back Cover 
О 
Ocean Shore Iron Works ............. usu 89 
Юта e Johnson nmaa 89 
(0) 5 Ех Companys eee Е 
Р 
Pacific Coast Engineering Со. ....................... 92 
Pacific Coast Electrical Bureau ........................ 8 
Pacific Coast Gas Association oea 5 
Расше Coast Steel Corp ae = 
Басса Co qe 77 
Басе Машат 91 
Расе Мен] бо Lra и ТІЛ) 
Pacific Portland Cement 60222 96 
Расе ат ат Cor соо о eee 91 
Parafine Companies „=з 1 
Earker eo Snc A AES et 89 
Picard Inc АНЫ, е er 88 
Боз Costa Brick МАНЫ n.r 88 
Q 
Quandt лы 91 
R 
Raphael солтан»: rU EN 91 
Republic кел. 92 
Rex John B» 86 
5 
аласа а ео 90 
тата оо 28-208 С TEE 88 
Sloane Wiese. [ee жин 84 
‘Smith Lumber Co. of Oakland ................... 87 
Stanley Works, bhe ere UM * 
Steellorm Contracting Со. e 90 
т 
Шету отра у ШЕ 88 
U 
United States Lime Products Co. ...................... 89 
V 
Van Fleet Егесат бо E 91 
Vaughan- G EDWG НЕНИ 83 
Volker e Com Wir сс хз ee 89 
ху 
Wells Fargo Ва 80 
еее По 92 
оо Шире Cor ЕЕ 85 
ү. 
Dionncacclblorsseycrge ME 87 


67 


PERSONAL 
ELMER В. STEM, architectural draftsman of Los 
Angeles, has been elected as one of twenty-five 
draftsmen to compete in the national competition 
finals for the design of double-hung sash windows, 
promoted by the Samson Cordage Works of Bos- 


ton. 


RussELL Rav, formerly at 27 W. Mission 
Street, has moved to 1205 Nopal Street, Santa 
Barbara. 


М. L. BARKER of Los Angeles has been ap- 
pointed chairman of the "small building commit- 
tee” of the State Association of California Arch- 
itects, according to an announcement by President 
Robert H. Orr. Other members of the committee 
are: Robert Н, Ainsworth, Douglas Н. McLellan 
and H. O. Sexsmith. 


Керт.Ав В. JoHNSON has opened an architectural 
office at 902 Fourth Ave., Seattle. He has pre- 
pared plans for a brick veneer residence on Vic- 
tory Heights. Mr. Johnson for ten years worked 
as a draftsman in the offices of Schack and Young, 
and David J. Myers, and received training at the 
University of California. 


SiLAs E. NELsEN and Евер С. Rouwops, archi- 
tects with offices at 9051 Commerce Street, 
Tacoma, announce the termination of their asso- 
ciation. Mr. Nelsen will maintain his office at 405 
South Sheridan Ave., Tacoma, while Mr. Rounds 
will be at 828 W. R. Rust Building, Tacoma. 


С. Frank Manon, architect, has moved his 
office to 404 Pantages Building from the Orpheum 
Building, Seattle. He is now preparing plans for 
an $85,000 church in West Seattle. 


Н. A. MorpENHOUR, formerly member of the 
firm of Lawton and Moldenhour, 15 now оссиру- 
ing quarters at 432 Republic Building, Seattle. 


Vernon W. Ноиснтом, formerly of San Fran- 
cisco, is now associated with Pacific Systems 
Homes, 5800 S. Boyle Ave., Vernon, having 
charge of the plan department for that company. 


Starks © FLANDERS, have moved to 310 Bank 
of America Building, Sacramento. 


ARCHITECTURAL EXAMINATION 
The regular examination for registered archi- 
tects in the State of Oregon will be held early in 
February. Architects desiring to take the exam- 
ination are invited to get in touch with Margaret 
Fritsch, Secretary, 807 Spalding Building, Port- 
land, Oregon. 


ate 


55 


SUBSCRIBERS MOVE 

А. А. CANTIN has moved to 557 Market Street, 
San Francisco. 

Tuomas M. Epwarps has moved to 525 Mar- 
ket Street, San Francisco. 

Pring © Lesswinc are now at 525 Market 
Street, San Francisco. 

CLARKSON SWAIN has moved to 2001 Pierce 
Street, San Francisco. 

GEoncE E. ELLINGER has moved to 1801 Cas- 
terline Road, Oakland. 

Horatio W. Взнор is at 1245 Stearns Drive, 
Los Angeles. 

J. Сивғовр ӚМІТН 8 new address is at 5959 
West Third Street, Los Angeles. 

HERMAN Louis BODMER moved to 4001 Illinois 
Street, San Diego. 

Epwarps © PLunxetr have moved to 116 East 
de la Guerra Street, Santa Barbara. 

WM. LYLE SKINNER, mining engineer, has 
moved from Lone Pine, Inyo County, to 1709 
Alder Street, Eugene, Oregon. 

Witrorp S. ВосиЕ has moved to 1409 Virginia 
Place, Fort Worth, Texas. 

AucusT GEIGER has moved to 731 Lincoln Road, 
Miami Beach, Florida. 

Davin Н. HorMEs has moved to 51-5th Ave., 
New York City. 


ARCHITECT PLACHEK'S BEREAVEMENT 


James W. Plachek, architect of Berkeley, has 
the sympathy of his many friends in the passing 
of his wife in the Oakland hospital on December 
31. А son was born to Mr. and Mrs. Plachek the 
day before Christmas. Mrs. Plachek was stricken 
with pneumonia before her baby's arrival and 
despite the mother's brave fight her vitality was 
not sufficient to carry her through the crisis of her 
illness. Mrs. Plachek was 36 years old and а 
graduate of the University of California. Mr. and 
Mrs. Plachek had only recently moved into their 
beautiful new home at 727 San Luis Road, Berke- 
ley. 


WOULD DESIGN FEDERAL BUILDINGS 

Washington Architects, Inc., is seeking to get 
action on the construction of Federal buildings in 
the State of Washington, particularly the nine 
projects allocated for early consideration, accord- 
ing to А. M. Young, Seattle director and member 
of the architectural firm of Schack and Young. 
'The nine projects on which there is a fair pros- 
pect of getting action are the Federal office build- 
ings at Bremerton, Centralia, Chehalis, Spokane, 
Shelton, Montesano and Kelso, and the quaran- 
tine stations at Port Townsend and Laurier. 


The Architect and Engineer, January, 1933 


Estimator’s Guide 


Giving Cost of Building Materials, Wage Scale, Etc. 


Amounts quoted are figuring prices and are made up from average quotations 
furnished by material houses to three leading contracting firms of San Francisco. 


Note New Wage Scale 


All prices and wages quoted are for 
San Francisco and the Bay District. 
There may be slight fluctuation of 
prices in the interior and southern 
part of the state. Freight cartage, at 
least, must be added in figuring coun- 
try work. 

Overtime in wage scale should he 
credited with time and a half, Sunday 
and holidays double. 


Bond—114% amount of contract. 


Brickwork— 
Common, $26 to $32 per 1000 laid, 
(according to class of work). 
Face, $60 to $80 per 1000 laid, (ac- 
cording to class of work). 

Brick Steps, using pressed brick, 
$.85 lin. ft. 

Brick Walls, using pressed brick on 
edge, 55c sq. ft. (Foundations ex- 


tra.) 

Brick Veneer on írame buildings, 
$.60 sq. ft. 

Common, f. о. b. cars, $14.00 plus 
cartage. 


Face, f.o.b. cars, $38.00 per 1000, 
carload lots. 


HOLLOW TILE FIREPROOFING (f.o.b. job) 


а ess $ 68.00 per M 
4x12x12 in. 16.50 per M 
рхо ine 105.00 per M 
е и 170.00 рег М 


HOLLOW BUILDING TILE (f.o.b. job) 
carload lots). 


Саза Me c АЕ $76.50 
6x12x515 


Composition Floors — 18c to 30c per 
sq. ft. In large quantities, 18c per 
sq. ft. laid. 

Mosaic Floors—80c per sq. ft. 


Duraflex Floor—23c to 30c sq. ft. 
Rubber Tile—50c per sq. ft. 

Terazzo Floors—40c to 55c per sq. ft. 
Terazzo Steps—$1.50 lin. ft. 


Concrete Work (material at San Fran- 
cisco bunkers) — Quotations below 
2000 Ibs. to the ton. 


No. 3 rock, at bunkers........ $1.66 per ton 
No. 4 rock, at bunkers...... 1.65 per ton 
Elllott top gravel, at bnkrs. 1.75 per ton 
Washed gravel, at bunkrs 1.75 per ton 
Vliott top gravel, at bnkrs. 1.75 per ton 
City gravel, at bunkers.... 1.40 per ton 
River sand, at bunkers...... 1.50 per ton 
Delivered bank sand............ 1.10 cu yd. 


Note—Above prices are subject to dis- 
count of 10c per ton on invoices paid 
on or before the 15th of month, fol- 
lowing delivery. 

SAND 


Del Monte, $1.75 to $3.00 per ton. 
Fan Shell Beach (car lots, f. o.b. 


The Architect and Engineer, January. 1933 


Lake Majella), $2.75 to $4.00 per 
ton. 

Cement, $2.25 per bbl. in paper sks. 

Cement (f.o.b. Job, S. F.) $2.45 per 
bbl. 

Cement (f.o.b. Job, Oak.) $2.45 per 


per bb 
Rebate of 10 cents bbl. cash in 15 
days. 
Medusa "White" .......... $ 8.50 per bbl. 


Forms, Labors average 22.00 per M. 
Average cost of concrete in place, 
exclusive of forms, 28c per cu. ft. 
4-inch concrete basement 
floor. 1216c to 18%с per за. it. 
4% inch Concrete Basement 
Шоо 13с to 14c per sq. ft. 
2-inch rat-proofing....64c per sq. ft. 
Concrete Steps.......... $1.00 per lin. ft. 


Dampproofing and Waterproofing— 
Two-coat work, I5c per yard. 
Membrane waterproofing—4 layers 

of saturated felt, $4.00 per square. 
Hot coating work, $1.80 per square. 
Meduca Waterproofing, 15c per 1b., 
San Francisco Warehouse. 


Electric Wiring — $2.75 to $8.50 per 
outlet for conduit work (including 


switches). 

Knob and tube average $2.25 to 
$5.00 per outlet, including 
switches. 

Elevators— 


Prices vary according to capacity, 
Speed and type. Consult elevator 
companies. Average cost of in- 
stalling an automatic elevator in 
four-story building, $2450; direct 
automatic, about $2100. 


Excavation— 

Sand, 40 cents; clay or shale, 90c 
per yard. 

Teams, $10.00 per day. 

Trucks, $18 to $25 per day. 

Above figures are an average with- 
out water. Steam shovel work in 
large quantities, less; hard ma- 
terial, such as rock, will run con- 
siderably more. 


Fire Eseapes— 
Ten-foot balcony, with stairs, 
$65.00 per balcony. 


Glass (consult with manufacturers)— 

Double strength window glass, 15c 
per square foot. 

Quartz Lite, 50c per square foot. 
Plate 80c per square foot, 

Art, $1.00 up per square foot. 

Wire (for skylights), 27c per square 
foot. 

Obscure glass, 25c square foot. 

Note—Add extra for setting. 


Henting— 
Average, $1.60 per sq. ft. of radla- 
tion, according to conditions. 


lron—Cost of ornamental iron, cast 
iron, etc., depends on designs. 
Luniber (prices delivered to bldg. site) 
Common, $18.00 per M (average). 
Common О.Р. select, average, $22.00 
per M. 
1x6 No. 3—Form Lumber 
1x4 No. 1 flooring УС. 
1x4 No. 2 flooring .... 
1x4 No. 3 flooring . 30.00 per M 
1x6 No. 2 flooring .... 42.00 per M 
144x4 and 6 No. 2 flooring... 50.00 per M 


Slash grain— 


1x4 No. 2 flooring .... 
1x4 No. 3 flooring . 
No. 1 common run 26.00 per M 
Lath 4.75 per M 


Shingles (add cartage to prices 
quoted)— 


Redwood, No. 1. 
Redwood, No. 2 .. 
Red Cedar 


..$14.00 per M 
42.00 per M 
36.00 per M 


$30.00 per M 
26.00 per M 


.$ .85 per bdle. 
.65 per bdle. 
.85 per bdle. 


Hardwood Flooring (delivered to 


building)— 
13-16x3!," T & С Maple .........8 90.00 M ft. 
1 1-16x2!," T & С Maple ... 117.00 M ft. 
"&x316 sq. edge Maple ............... 110.00 M ft. 
1016x214" 3х2” §-16x2” 
T&G T&G Sq.Ed 


Cir. Qtd. Oak ....$176.00 M $125.00 М $158 M 
Sel. Qtd. Oak .. 115.00 М 95.00 М 110M 
Сїт. Pla. Oak .... 110.00 M 87.00M 95M 
Sel. Pla. Oak — 106.00 M 68.00 М 82M 
Clear Maple ....... 110.00 M — 82.00 M 
Laying & Finishing 14cft. 12 ft. 
Wage—Floor layers, $9.00 per day. 


11с ft. 


Building Paper— 
1 ply per 1000 ft. 
2 ply per 1000 ft. 
3 ply per 1000 ft. 
Sisalkraft, 500 ft. 
Sash cord com. No. 7 
Sash cord com. No. 8.. .. 1.10 per 100 ft. 
Sash cord spot Хо. 7........ 1.60 per 100 ft. 
Sash cord spot No. $..... 1.90 рег 100 ft, 
Sash weights cast iron, $46.00 ton 
Nails, $2.85 base. 

Belgian nails, $2.60 base. 


roll... 


Millwork— 

О. Р. $74.00 per 1000. В. W., $80.00 
per 1000 (delivered). . 
Double hung box window frames, 
average, with trim, $5.00 and пр. 

each. 

Doors, including trim (single panel, 
134 in. Oregon pine) $5.75 and up, 
each. 

Doors, including trim (five panel, 
134 in. Oregon pine) $5.50 each. 

Screen doors, $3.50 each. 

Patent screen windows, 20c a sq. ft. 
Cases for kitchen pantries seven ft. 
high, per lineal ft., $4.25 each. 
Dining room cases, $5.25 per llreal 

foot. 

Labor—Rough carpentry, warehouse 
heavy framing (average), $11.00 
per M. 

For smaller work, average, $22 to 
$30 per 1000. 


69 


2 coata, hard wall plaster, wood lath.... 


Redwood Shingles, $11.00 per square. 


Marble— (See Dealers) 


3 coats, metal lath and үа in place. 

Painting— бейш wit NE hot oll channels Cedar Shingles, $10 sq. in place. 
Two-coat work ..27¢ per yard lathe ese ee о Recoat, with Gravel, $3.00 per sq. 
Three-coat work ..96c per yard Ceilings with % hot roll channels meta 

RA a lath plastered: namemera rrea eani 1.30 Sheet Metal— 
Cold Water Painting ...... 8c per yard Shingl tit h i'iath 1 side 60 t 
Whitewashing МаК — 4c per yard Single partition % аата ТЕН 2 aidea h hien о $1.80 А за. И. 2 
Turpentine, 70c per gal, in cans and MIN CHESBUNIC Ka ежен д ire oors average), ше in 
Soe per gal. in drums, ыи о d hardware, $200 per sq. it. 
Raw Linseed Oil—62c gal. in bbls. EB Шон cues % channel lath , Skylights— 
Boiled Linseed Oil—65c gal. in bbls, Sides plastered ............................... 2.2 € и 
: Е ae opper, $1.00 sq. ft. (not glazed). 
Medusa Portland Cement Paint, 206 | Plastering—Exterior : 5 Е | 
o Yard Galvanized iron, 25c за. ft. (not 
per lb. ЖҰЗ * 2 coata cement finish, brick or con- glazed). | 
Carter or Datch Boy White Lead in : өх wall т о $ .90 
Oil (in steel kegs). coats аз cemen rick or con- Steel-— Structural 
t jg pu D 1.15 
1 ton tts. 1G IDS. Del ЫЙЫ. ШЕЕ з "enata "cement finish No. 18 gauge $78 ton (erected), this quotation is 
0 * Wire тено е d 1 
500 Ib. and less than 1 ton lots 11c 3 coata Medusa finiah No. 18 gauge ЕШ. та hee н 
han 500 1Ъ. lots 11% с уге тен ж ононе 2.90 q . uig 
е8 анса ы 2 Wood lath, $4.00 per 1000. work higher. Plain beams and 
Duen ТИ Woy au enil mmi 2.9-Ib. metal lath (dipped) Jn column work in large quantities 
Litharge (in steel kegs). 2.6-Ib. metal lath (galvanized). .20 z а 3 
100 1b. k t wt. 1034 3.4-Ъ. metal lath (dipped)... „22 $71 to $75 per ton cost of steel; 
1 ton lots, lb. kegs, net wt. 104€ 3.4-]b. metal lath (galvanized). 128 average building, $77.00. 


500 lb. and less than 1 ton lots 11c 
Less than 500 1b. lots.................. 1115c 
Red Lead in Oil (in steel kegs) 


84-inch hot roll channels, $72 ре 

Finiah plaster, $16.40 ton; in paper васке, 

Dealer's commission, $1.00 off above 
quotations. 


Steel Reinforcing— 
$68.00 per ton, set, (average). 


1 ton lots, 100 1b. keg s,net. wt. 12%с $13.85 (rebate 10c ack). M Tu Stone— А 
3 S 215 Lime, f.o.b. warehouse, $2.25bbl. ;cars, $2. i К AE 1 
а tonlots 1 Е rs Ны deque |o average, $6.50 cu. foot In 
OO. Ў Wall Board 5 ply, $43.00 per M. р А 
Note—Accessibility and couditions Hydrate Lime, $19.50 ton. Sandstone, average Blue, $3.50; 


cause wide variance of costs. 


Compositlon Stucco—$1.35 to $1.75 рег 
sq. yard (applied). 


Boise, $2.60 sq. ft. in place. 
Indiana Limestone, $2.60 per sq. ft. 


Patent. un in place. 


6-inch..... = .90 lineal foot Pinmbiug— 

$-iuch... ... 1.80 lineal foot From $55.00 per fixture up, accord- Store Fronts— 

10-inch. . 1.50 lineal foot ing to grade, quantity and runs. Copper sash bars for store fronts, 
12-inch. . 1.75 lineal foot corner, center and around sides, 


Roofing— 
"Standard" tar and gravel, $5.00 per 
square for 30 squares or over. 
Less than 30 squares, $5.25 рег sq. 
Tile, $17.00 to $30.00 per square. 


will average 70c per lineal foot. 


Plastering—Interior— Note—Consult with agents. 


Yard 

1 coat, brown mortar only, wood lath....$0.36 
2 a lime mortar hard finish, wood 

АЙ ссуза .45 


Tile — Floor, Wainscot, Ete. — (See 
Dealers). 


SAN FRANCISCO BUILDING TRADES WAGE SCALE FOR 1933. 


Established by The Impartial Wage Board November 9, 1932. Effective ап ай wark January 1, 1933, to remain in effect until June 30, 1933, and for so 
lang thereafter as economic conditions remain substantially ‘unchanged. 


This scale із hased on an eight-hour day and is to be considered as a minimum and employees of superior 


skill and craft knowledge may be paid in excess of the amounts set forth herein. 


Journeyman Journeyman CRAFT Journey man 
CRAFT Mechanics CRAFT Mechanica Mechanics 
Ásbestor Workers ...$6.40 Iron Workers (Bridge and Structural). 9.60 Stair Builders 7.20* 
Bricklayers pee 9.00 lron Workers (Hoisting Engineera) ...... 10.00 Stone Cutters, Soft and Granite 6.80 
Bricklayers’ Hodcarriers 5.60 Laborers (6-day week) . 5.00 Stone Settera, Soft and Granite 8.00 
Cabinet Workera (Outside) 227.2105 Lathers, Channel Iron 8.00 Stone Derrickmen . 7.20 
Caisson Workers (Open) Water Work... $8.00 Lathers, All Other 6.80 Tile Setters .......... 8.00 
Carpentera ....... 1.20* Marhle Setters . 8.00 Tile Setters’ Helpers 5.00 
Cement Finishers . 7.20 Marble Setters’ 5.00 Tile, Cork amd Rubber 207.20 
Cork Insulation Wo 7.20 Millwrights 7.20% Welders, Structural St Frame on 
Electrical МогКега ............ 8.00 Mosaic and Terrazzo Workers (Ontsi e) 1.20 Buildings ....... arcs КІЛІ) 
Electrical Fixture Hangera 7.00 Mosaic and Terrazzo Helpers ... 5.00 Welders, Ali Others on “Buildings .. 8.00 
Elevator Constructors ......... 8.68 Painters 7.00 Auto Truck Drivers—Less than 2,500 lbs. 5.50 
Etevator Construrtors’ Helpers 6.08 Painters, Varnishers and Auto Truck Drivers—2,500 lbs. to 
Engineers, Portahle and Hoisting 8.00 (Outside) ..... 7.00 авт. see. 6.00 
Glass Workers (All Classifications) 6.80 Pile Drivers and Wharf "Builders 8.00 Auto Truck  Drivers—4,500 Its. to 
Hardwood Floormen ... 1.20* Pile Drivera Engineers .. 9.00 6,500 Ibs. ....... 6.50 
Housemovers . ... 6.40 Plasterers а: 8.80 Auto Truck Drivers—6, 500. Ths, ‘and over 7.00 
Housesmitha, Architectural Iron (Out- Plasterers’ Hodcarriers 2 6.00 General Teamsters, 1 Horse . . 5.50 
айе) ЖЕ. Сс 07:20 Plumbera ... 8.00 General] Teamsters, 2 Horses . 6.00 
Housesmiths, Reinforced C Roofers (At 6.40 General Teamsters, 4 Horses 6.50 
Rodmeng E 1.20 Sheet Metal Workers .. 1.20 Plow Teamsters, 4 Horses .. 6.50 
Sprinkler Fitters _. 9.00 Scraper Teamsters, 2 Horse 6.00 
*Established by Special Board Steam Fitters ......... 8.00 Scraper Teamsters, 4 Horses .. 6.00 


GENERAL WORKING CONDITIONS 


1. Eight hours shall constitute a day’s work 9, Overtime shall be paid as follows: For 
for all crafts. except as otherwise noted. the first four hours after the first eight 
. Where leas than eight hours are worked houra, time and one-half. All time there- 
pro rata ratea for such shorter period shall after shall be paid double time. Satur- 


men reporting for work shall work at 
straight time. Any work performed on 
such jobs after midnight shall be paid 
time and one-half up to four houra of 


гә 


he paid. 

3. Plasterers’ Hodearriers, Bricklayers’ Hod- 
carriers, Roofers’ Laborers and Engineers, 
Portahle and Hoisting, shall atart 15 min- 

utes before other workmen, both at morn- 
ing and at noon. 

4. Five days, consisting of not more than 
eight houra a day, on Monday to Friday 
inclusive, shall constitute a week's work. 

. The wages set forth herein shall be con- 
sidered as net wages. 

6. Except as noted the above rates of pay ap- 
ply only to work performed at the job 
site. 

. Transportation costs in excess of twenty- 
five cents each way shall be paid hy the 
contractor, 

$. Traveling time in excess of one and one- 
half hours each way shall he paid for at 

straight time rates. 


EI 


NOTE: Provision of paragraph 13 appcaring in brackets ( ) does not app'y to Carpenters, 


wrirhts, or Stair Builders. 


70 


10. On 


11. Where two 


12. All work, 


days (except Laborers), Sundays and Holi- 
days from 12 midnight of the preceding 
day, shall be paid double time. Іггеврес- 
tive of starting time, overtime for Cement 
Finishers shall not commence until after 
eight hours of work. 


Saturday Laborers shall be paid 
straight time for an eight-hour day. 


shifts are worked in any 
twenty-four hours, shift time shall be 
straight time. Where three shifts are 
worked. eight hours' pay shall be paid 
for seven hours on the second and third 
shifts. 

except as noted in paragraph 
13, shall be performed between the hours 
of 8 A. M. and 5 P. M. 


13. In emergencies, or where premises cannot 


be vacated until the close of business, 


14. 


15. 


16. 


overtime and double time thereafter (рго- 
vided, that if а new crew is employed on 
Saturdays, Sundays or Holidays which has 
not worked during the five preceding work- 
ing days, such crew shall be paid time 
and one-half. No job can be considered 
as an emergency job until it haa been 
registered with the Industrial Association 
and a determination has been made that 
the job falls within the terma of this 
section). 

Recognized holidays to be: New Year's 
Day, Decoration Day, Fourth of July. 
Labor Day, Admission Day, Thanksgiving 
Day, Christmas Day. 

Men ordered to report for work, for 
whom no employment 13 provided shall be 
entitled to two hours’ pay. 

This award shall be effective in the City 
and County of San Francisco. 


Cabinet Workera (Outside), Hardwood Floormen, Mill- 


Tlie Architect and Engineer, January. 1933 


!!! 


NI— 


Chapter and Club Meetings 


I ————M 


WASHINGTON STATE CHAPTER 

The December meeting of Washington State 
Chapter, А.1.А., was held at the New Washing- 
ton Hotel, Seattle, with a good attendance. 

The minutes of the last regular meeting were 
read by the secretary and approved. This was 
followed by the report of the treasurer, which was 
likewise approved. 


Reports of committees being next in order; Mr. 
Albertson, the chairman of the committee on pro- 
posed by-law revision providing a tax on salaries 
and commissions, reported that the committee, 
having decided on an amount of exemption for 
annual salaries оп which dues would be collect- 
able as $2,600, it was proposed to amend the by- 
laws to include dues from salaries and consulta- 
tion fees, the dues from salaries to be at the rate 
of $8.00 for each $1,000 of salary received annu- 
ally in excess of $2,600, and from consultation 
fees, $5.00 for each $1,000 in excess of the first 
$1,000 received. 


The proposed amendments were adopted with 
a further amendment that one-half of the dues 
received from these sources, or larger proportion 
if the members so desired, be added to the endow- 
ment fund, but it was voted that this assignment 
to the endowment fund be temporarily suspended 
as was the case with dues from commissions. 


Mr. Young reported for the Washington Arch- 
itects, Incorporated, that progress was being made 
through correspondence with senators and repre- 
sentatives in Congress, treasury officials, Cham- 
bers of Commerce and others, to promote the pur- 
poses of the organization, to give publicity and 
extend its influence; and this was being given 
continuous attention. 


The president announced that Mr. Albertson 
had been appointed to represent the Chapter in 
the consideration of reported violations of the 
Seattle Building Code in apartment house build- 
ing. : 

The report of the nominating committee was 
presented by Mr. Ford in the absence of the 
chairman, as follows: 

For President—J. Lister Holmes. 

For Ist Vice-President—R. F. McClelland. 

For 2nd Vice-President—Ernest T. Mock. 

For 3rd Vice-President—Harry C. Weller. 

For Secretary—Lance E. Gowen. 

For Treasurer—Albert M. Allen. 


The Architect and Engineer, January, 1933 


For Executive Board, 3-year term—Frederick 
V. Lockman. 

For Delegates to the Institute convention, with 
the president and secretary, delegates ex-officio 
—R. F. McClelland, George W. Stoddard and 
Harold C. Whitehouse. 

Letcher Lambuth, realty dealer of Seattle, atter 
a few preliminary remarks relative to general con- 
ditions affecting business locations, proceeded to 
demonstrate a scientific study his firm had made 
of use zones in Seattle down town real estate. By 
means of a relief model of the business area, and 
colored poker chips, he showed how the proper 
location for a given merchant could be determined. 
In this interesting visual way, Mr. Lambuth 
showed how intersecting lines from main centers 
of pedestrian flow agreed with the traffic count on 
various streets, how certain sites had been wrongly 
occupied, noting the zones of distress leases, the 
movement of retail centers and other interesting 
findings in relation to business location. 

In response to some questions asked by Mr. 
Borhek relative to possible changes in the schedule 
of charges, Mr. Albertson was asked to give in- 
formation as a member of the Institute committee 
on the subject and spoke of some suggested revi- 
sions under consideration by the committee and 
said that expressions of opinion from the Chap- 
ter would be in order. After some discussion, it 
was voted that the Chapter recommend the adop- 
tion by the Institute of the schedule adopted by 
the Chapter. 


WASHINGTON STATE SOCIETY 

Washington State Society of Architects, at its 
annual meeting Thursday, December 8, at the 
Moore Hotel in Seattle, elected the following offi- 
cers: 

President: John S. Hudson, Seattle. 

First vice-president: Julius A. Zittle, Spokane. 

Second vice-president: Stanley A. Smith, Pull- 


. man. 


Third vice-president: Robert Max Thorne, 
Renton. 

Fourth vice-president: R. C. Stanley, Seattle. 

Secretary: Isaac L. Wright, Seattle. 

Treasurer: H. G. Hammond, Seattle. 

Trustee: W. C. Jackson, Seattle. 

The Society is working with Washington Arch- 
itects Inc. in an effort to obtain the retention of 
Washington architects for the design of Federal 


buildings. 


71 


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA CHAPTER 


Officers and directors for 1933 were elected at 
the December meeting of Southern California 
Chapter on December 13 as follows: Gordon B. 
Kaufmann, president; Sumner M. Spaulding, vice- 
president; Palmer Sabin, secretary; Paul J. Dun- 
can, treasurer; Carleton M. Winslow, director for 
the three-year term. 

Delegates to the 1933 national convention of the 
Institute were elected as follows: D. C. Allison, 
J. E. Allison, Roland E. Coate, Robert Н. Orr, 
William Richards and David ]. Witmer; alter- 
nates: R. D. Farquhar, Sumner Hunt, S. B. Mars- 
ton, Wm. Field Staunton, Paul J. Duncan and 
H. C. Nickerson. 

The larger part of the evening was devoted to 
an open discussion of the fresco painting in Olvera 
Street, recently completed by David Alfaro Sique- 
iros. F. K. Ferenz, founder of the Plaza Art Cen- 
ter, and Arthur Millier lead the discussion. 


SEATTLE ARCHITECTURAL CLUB 


The Seattle Architectural Club has elected the 
following officers: Harry K. Wolfe, president; 
Richard Lytel, vice-president; G. Adolph Eng- 
strom, secretary; and Elso B. DiLuck, treasurer. 
The group has selected Carl F. Gould to be its 
critic. 

The study of projects relating to the develop- 
ment of Seattle has been made the chief activity 
of the club. At present drawings of a proposed 
monument to honor Seattle's pioneers and to be 
situated on Duwamish Head are being prepared. 
The structure was first studied by the members as 
a sketch problem—each man presenting his own 
individual design. The winning design, judged by 
Messrs. David J. Myers, R. C. Reamer and Victor 
Jones, is now being developed and presented by 
the group as a club project. 

Etchings and block-prints are made on the etch- 
ing press at the club-room, 4144 White-Stuart 
Building. 


WATER COLOR SKETCHES 

Ап interesting collection of water color sketches 
of European studies will be exhibited by Robert 
Stryker in the Architects’ Exhibit rooms, Fifth and 
Figueroa Streets, Los Angeles, from February 
15th to February 28th inclusive. 

Harvard University has appointed Mr. Stryker 
assistant instructor in Landscape Architecture. 
While studying at California University he won 
the Harvard traveling fellowship in Landscape 
Architecture. It was while attending college that 
he made the water color sketches which are being 
shown in Los Angeles. 


72 


OREGON CHAPTER DECEMBER 
MEETING 


Officers for the new year were nominated at 
the regular monthly meeting of Oregon Chapter, 
A. I. A., December 22. Twenty-three members 
and associates were present with James D. Mackie 
as guest. 


Mr. Mackie addressed the meeting urging 
architects to make more use of the Building Ма- 
terial Dealers Credit Association when awarding 
contracts. He also declared himself satisfied with 
the present lien law. 


Chairman Folger Johnson, of the Nominating 
Committee, reported the following candidates for 
Chapter offices: ; 


President, Harold W. Doty; Vice-President, 
Fred Aandahl; Secretary, W. H. Crowell; Treas- 
urer, Harry A. Herzog; Trustee, Herman Brook- 
man. 


These nominations are of present officers ех- 
cept Brookman for trustee, whose nomination is to 
fill the place of Jamieson Parker, whose three 
year term expires. The holdover trustees are 
Messrs. Holford and Wallwork. President Doty 
submitted a minority report urging that the mem- 
bers take advantage of the following provision 
in the By-Laws: 


“At any time after the December meeting and 
not less than five days before the annual meeting, 
separate lists of nominations may be submitted to 
the Secretary of the Chapter by any five or more 
members whose signature must be appended to 
such list. 


“Such lists of nominations must be complete 
for each and every office, including those in which 
they may not differ from the list submitted by the 
Nominating Committee.” 

Both reports were accepted. 


Secretary Baldwin's letter of December 9th 
relative to those who are behind in the payment 
of Institute dues, was read by President Doty. 


A report of the Building Laws Committee re- 
garding proposed shingle roof ordinance was read 
by President Doty and accepted. 


Е. В. Lawrence spoke of the great need of со- 
operation among the branches of the building т- 
dustry in order that Oregon may participate in the 
financing offered by the Federal Government 
through the Reconstruction Finance Corporation 
and the Home Loan Bank. He urged that the 
Oregon Building Congress is the logical organiza- 
tion to head the state’s activities in this line. 


Clifford E. Clausen, architect of Portland, Ore- 
gon, has applied for Associateship with the Ore- 
gon Chapter. --УУ. Н. С. 


The Architect and Епдіпсег. January, 1933 


WM. S. DINWIDDIE, BUILDER 

'The sudden passing of William S. Dinwiddie, 
prominent San Francisco builder, at his home in 
Berkeley, California, was a shock to the building 
world and an irreparable loss to the construction 
industry. Only a couple of days before his death 
it was the good fortune of the editor of this maga- 
zine to chat with Mr. Dinwiddie in his office over 
matters of vital interest to the architectural pro- 
fession and building trades. Some of his views 
were published in an editorial in last month's issue. 
Mr. Dinwiddie was a born builder; he understood 
the contracting, business from A to Z and archi- 
tects liked to have him figure their work because 
they knew his estimating was dependable. When 
his company signed a contract it was a guarantee 
that the job would be done thoroughly and well. 
Mr. Dinwiddie was a very active man—too active 
in fact, for one his age—61, and the strenuous 
days which he lived, coupled with business wor- 
ries characteristic of the times, are believed to 
have hastened the end. 


Founder and owner of the Dinwiddie Construc- 
tion Company, Mr. Dinwiddie had engaged in 
general building contracting throughout the Pacific 
Coast since the establishment of headquarters in 
San Francisco in 1912. Well and favorably known 
throughout the country, his construction interests 
extended the length of the Western coast. 


Among some of the more important structures 
which he built are the Russ Building, Golden Gate 
Theater and Southern Pacific terminal, in San 
Francisco; the Central National Bank and Finan- 
cial Center Buildings in Oakland; the Life Sci- 
ences Building and the new Men's Gymnasium, 
which is now nearly completed, at the University 
of California, Berkeley. He also was interested 
in the recent construction of the Veterans Mem- 
опа] and Opera House buildings in San Fran- 
cisco. 


Prior to the establishment of his own business 
on the Pacific Coast, eighteen years ago. Mr. 
Dinwiddie was associated with Thompson Star- 
rett Company of New York. 

Mr. Dinwiddie had made his home in Berkeley 
for nearly a score of years. He was a member of 
the Hillcrest Lodge of Masons, San Francisco; of 
the Claremont and Mt. Diablo Country Clubs and 
of Portland Lodge of Elks. 

Mr. Dinwiddie was one of three membe:s of 
the Impartial Wage Board selected to fix wages 
for various crafts, the work of this board being 
only recently completed. 

Mr. Dinwiddie leaves a widow, Mrs. Helen S. 
Dinwiddie, and four sons, G. C. Dinwiddie, John 
E. Dinwiddie, architect, James Dinwiddie and 
Stewart Dinwiddie. He also was the father of 
W. S. Dinwiddie. Jr., who passed away in 1929. 


The Architect and Engineer, January. 1933 


ENGINEER WRITES TECHNICAL BOOK 


А new method of analyzing continuous frames 
and beams titled, "The Analysis of Continuous 
Frames by the Method of Restraining Stiffnesses" 
has been published by W. Н. Ellison and Earle 
Russell, Consulting Structural Engineers, 712 
Pacific Building, San Francisco. In this publica- 
tion the author presents a quick, accurate and 
straightforward method for the analysis of con- 
tinuous frames or beams, giving the results direct- 
ly without the use of simultaneous equations or a 
series of approximations. The book treats both 
members of uniform and variable moments of in- 
ertia; complete solutions are given for several 
typical problems. А very comprehensive set of 
34 tables is included which give the constants for 
many different shaped members permitting the 
solution of many problems directly. In addition, 
the tables may be used directly in the Hardy 
Gross method. Copies of the 150 page book may 
be obtained from the publishers for the nominal 
fee of $2.00. 


NEW LOW COST WIRING 


Xtensionduct is the new name of material for 
an electrical wiring method announced by the 
National Electric Products Corporation of Pitts- 
burgh, Pa. 

Xtensionduct is a metal duct for extending ex- 
isting outlets neatly, reasonably, simply, in almost 
an invisible manner and at very low cost of mate- 
rial and labor. lt is designed for extension of a 
circuit only, and therefore, takes two No. 14 wires 
which are laid in the duct and the cover snapped 
on. The duct is finished in a neutral brown or 
mahogany and can be changed easily to any color 
by one coat of quick drying enamel. 

The electrical contractor now has a low cost 
extension which competes with non-metallic meth- 
ods that quickly became unsightly, bothersome and 
of a more or less frail nature. 


NEW WAGE SCALE IN FORCE 


Reductions in wages of building trades workers 
ranging from 50 cents to $2.20 per day and aver- 
aging 20 per cent for different crafts as compared 
with the 1932 scale made by the Impartial Wage 
Board of San Francisco, became effective January 
1. Under the new schedule wages of bricklayers 
are reduced from $11.00 to $9.00 per day, plast- 
erers from $11.00 to $8.80, painters from $9.00 to 
$7.00, electric workers from $9.00 to $8.00 and 
laborers (based on a six-day week) from $5.50 
to $5.00. 

The new scale is based on a five-day week and 
an eight-hour day and is subject to review after 
June 30. The new scale is published in detail on 
the Building Material Cost Sheet in this issue. 


CONFESSIONS OF AN 
ENGLISH ARCHITECT 


(From Architectural Design and Construction, London) 


Whenever in polite society I happen to hear 
people speaking of architecture my senses quicken 
with surprise. Why is this? Whenever | over- 
hear a conversation, say, in a train or an ale- 
house, and the word "architect" is mentioned my 
heart sickens in alarm, for I feel certain that 1 
shall hear no good of my kind. Again, why is 
this? Everywhere I meet the same ignorance as 
to what the architect really is. 


It may be that the architect, like a many-headed 
hydra, is too manifold in his activities to be 
grasped as one complete idea. Perhaps it is quite 
impossible to resolve such an amorphous creature 
into something definite in the landscape of public 
life. For the mass mind likes definite pictures. It 
likes criminals to be out-and-out criminals (pref- 
erably gangsters), it likes clergymen to wear 
shovel hats and speak always with inaudible dron- 
ing voices (and clergymen certainly play up to 
this); it likes artists to have long hair and flowing 
ties; and not for one moment would it tolerate a 
barrister with a beard, even if he had the virtues 
of Sir John Simon, Marshall Hall, and Norman 
Birkett, all rolled into one. Decidedly a barrister 
would starve in a beard. Yet (and this is our 
weakness) architects appear in all manner of 
guises: some have beards and some have not; 
some are clean shaven, some are half-shaven; some 
are dreamy and artistic, others are hard-boiled 
and business-like. How can people idolize the 
architect when the idol looks different each time 
they look at him? 


Something ought to be done about this. 1t seems 
that the architect must take more interest in his 
appearance. He must come out into the open asa 
public figure. For the British and American public 
love personalities; they feast on them. In the mass 
mind, what is literature compared with Bernard 
Shaw? What is sculpture compared with Jacob 
Epstein? Who cares a tinker’s cuss about the film 
so long as Greta Garbo is in it? It is the flesh 
and blood which thrills, not the wretched stuff of 
which the art is made. 


But what is the architect to do about this? He 
cannot so easily appear upon the stage in one guise 
only. His very nature has all the inherent weak- 
nesses of duality. He has to be both a philosophic 
artist and a calculating business man, and no per- 
son can possibly grasp this duality without a head- 
ache. And perhaps the public is right. For it is 
impossible to develop to the fullest extent these 
two sides of our nature in one person; and І often 
think that in view of our difficulty between the 


74 


conflicting demands of imaginative design and cal- 
culating economic structure, it would be better not 
to pretend to be both at the same time, but to be 
the perfect artist on say, Mondays, Wednesdays 
and Fridays, and the perfect business man on 
Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, and in each 
department thoroughly to affect the appropriate 
dress, disguise, and properties. But perhaps the 
simplest solution lies in the specialization of our 
work into two types of men, ie. the architect- 
designer and the architect-constructor. Of course, 
in many architectural partnerships this already 
works, and no doubt in one or two large busi- 
nesses even a triple arrangement might be held to 
exist with a designer, a constructor and a business 
manager. But they all call themselves vaguely 
"architects"; and what is most curious, there is 
no proper official recognition for such specializa- 
tion, neither in the organization of the profession 
nor in the methods of training in the schools. 
Everyone learns a little bit about design, a little 
bit about steelwork calculation, a little or nothing 
about business. We have to pick the rest up as 
best we may in the rough and tumble of exper- 
ience—that is, when we are lucky enough to get 
experience. 


But my suggestion for organizing ourselves into 
the Siamese twins of "architect-designer" and 
"architect-constructor" would have the merit of 
extending or rather reabsorbing those territories 
which have seceded on the one hand to the inter- 
ior decorator, and on the other hand, to the civil 
engineer. Yet there is no reason why these latter 
gentlemen should not join forces with us, and al- 
though this may sound a somewhat revolutionary 
idea, it has already taken place abroad where the 
architect-designer and civil engineer belong to the 
same professional body. 

“Авсні VOLTA.” 


ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN 


Educational courses of interest to men and 
women in the field of architecture and the fine arts 
have been inaugurated by the downtown night 


division of the University of Southern California. 


The schedule of classes in architecture includes 
a group of five night courses in architectural de- 
sign, taught by Clayton M. Baldwin and held in 
the school of architecture on the Southern Cali- 
fornia campus. In addition, Arthur C. Weather- 
head, dean of the school, will offer a night course 
in the history of architecture at University Col- 
lege while Robert M. Fox, professor of engineer- 
ing, will instruct a class in architectural engineer- 
ing on the campus. 


The Architect and Engincer, January, 1933 


CODE OF ETHICS 


А new code of ethics and practice has recently 
been adopted by Southern California Chapter, 
American Institute of Architects, and copies have 
been distributed to members. The draft was edited 
by Wiliam Richards of Los Angeles, to whom 
the task of putting into written form the standards 
and ideals of the Institute members was assigned 
by the executive committee of the Southern Cali- 
fornia Chapter. The text of the code follows: 


I 
Architect's Relation to Client 


The relation of an Architect to his client is one 
depending on good faith. As professional adviser 
to his client, his advice must be absolutely disin- 
terested. He must have no financial or personal 
interests, outside of his profession which would 
prejudice his advice or his conduct, or weaken or 
discredit his professional standing. He must act 
with entire impartiality in all matters affecting the 
respective rights of Client and Contractor. He 
must explain the conditional character of estimates 
made before final drawings and specifications are 
complete, and may not by careless statements mis- 
lead a client as to the probable cost of an under- 
taking. In presenting preliminary estimates of cost 
he must use every means at his disposal to insure 
that such estimates are accurate and complete and 
that they include contractors profits, architect's 
fees and all other incidental costs. His working 
drawings, details and specifications must be so 
complete that there can be no misinterpretation as 
to their intent and no ambiguities which would 
justify an increased cost. All contracts drawn by 
him must fully protect all interests of both parties. 
After the award of a contract he must keep his 
client constantly informed of all changes, and may 
not authorize any change involving cost without 
his clients written approval. At the completion of 
the work he must render to his client a complete 
statement of gross cost, showing the original con- 
tract price, all additions and deductions thereto or 
therefrom, identified in each case with his client’s 
form of approval, and all profits, commissions, fees 
and other charges contributing to the total cost 
of the undertaking. His charges to his client for 
professional services must be based on the char- 
acter of such services in conformity with the rec- 
ommendations of the Institute, and should be 
clearly stated in contract form at the time of his 
retention. Under no circumstances shall he receive 
commissions, fees, gifts, favors or any substantial 
service from a contractor or from any interested 
person other than his client. 


И 
Architect's Relation to Contractor 


Although an Architect is employed and paid 
by his client and is therefore pledged to protect 


The Architect and Engincer, January, 1933 


and subserve the legitimate interests of such client, 
he is nevertheless equally responsible for protect- 
ing the legitimate interests of the contractor. He 
must condemn workmanship and materials not in 
conformity with the contract documents, but he 
must also give every reasonable aid toward a more 
complete understanding of such documents, and 
do everything in his power to forestall a contract- 
or's loss through misinterpretation of the require- 
ments. Under no circumstances shall he require 
a contractor to make good oversights and errors 
in the contract documents, nor shall he demand of 
a contractor, without additional compensation, any 
work which is not provided for in such documents. 
He shall not incur obligations to a contractor, 
material manufacturer or any other similarly in- 
terested person, by receiving from him free engi- 
neering services or other emolument. He must give 
or confirm, in writing, all instructions to the con- 
tractor, and issue over his signature all modifica- 
tions of contract, showing the agreed cost or al- 
lowance for the change. By vigilant inspection 
of, and close contact with, the work, he must coop- 
erate with the contractor to obtain the best results 
consistent with the contract documents. 


Ш 
Architect's Relation to Other Architects 


An Architect may not knowingly compete with 
a fellow Architect on a basis of professional 
charges, nor may he falsely or maliciously injure, 
directly or indirectly, the professional reputation, 
prospects or business of a fellow Architect. He 
may not attempt to supplant another Architect 
after definite steps have been taken by a client 
toward his employment, nor may he undertake a 
commission for which another has been employed 
until he has determined that the original relation 
has been fairly and properly terminated. He may 
introduce to a possible client the service which 


` he is able to perform, but may not give such serv- 


ice in the form of sketches and the like, without 
compensation, until he has been definitely retained. 
Under no circumstances may he offer his services 
in competition with other architects, except in a 
properly regulated competition as outlined by the 
Institute. 


IV 
Architect's Responsibility to the Public 


The profession of architecture calls for men of 
the highest integrity, business capacity, and pro- 
fessional ability. An Architect is intrusted with 
financial undertakings in which his honesty of 
purpose must be above suspicion. He is charged 
with the exercise of judicial functions as between 
client and contractors in which his judgment must 
be absolutely impartial. His motives, conduct and 


75 


ability at all times must be of a character to com- 
mand general respect and confidence. He may not 
advertise for the purpose of self-laudatory public- 
ity. He may not take part, or give any assistance, 
in obtaining advertisements or other support to- 
ward meeting the expense of any publication il- 
lustrating his work. While his contribution of 
time and ability to all worthy objects of public 
welfare is greatly commended, he may not lend 
his name or support to any questionable proceed- 
ing. He is responsible not only for the creation of 
lasting monuments to his art, but also for the 
public safety. In the discharge of his artistic, 
technical and moral responsibilities, he must at all 
times maintain the highest standards of his pro- 
fession 


ENGINEERS TO MEET IN CHICAGO 


What promises to be the greatest and most im- 
portant conference of engineers ever held in this 
country will convene in Chicago during the week 
of June 25-30 in connection with A Century of 
Progress Exposition. World's Fair officials have 
designated this period as "Engineering Week”, 
апа one day will be known as “Engineer's Day”. 

Early estimates of the probable attendance of 
engineers from all parts of the country, as well as 
from many European countries, place the figure 
at a minimum of 25,000 with a possibility of triple 
that number. 

А general committee known as the Engineering 
Societies Committee of A Century of Progress 
Exposition has already been established in Chi- 
cago under the chairmanship of Harry B. Gear. 
Organization work is now under way and a num- 
ber of sub-committees have been appointed to 
function on the various phases of the coming 
event. 

The plan is for the various societies to hold in- 
dividual or joint meetings of their own groups ex- 
cept for "Engineers Day" when all groups will 
join in a giant conference. 

The outstanding engineers of this and other 
countries will appear on the program to report 
the newest developments in their respective fields. 

Coincident with the speaking program there 
will be held an exposition of power and engineer- 
ing machinery and appliances in keeping with the 
size and importance of the gathering. 

Approval of participation has already been 
given by 19 engineering associations, either by 
their national headquarters, or through their Chi- 
cago Chapters. Others will also participate. The 
organizations cooperating are as follows: 

American Association of Engineers 

American Ceramics Society 

American Foundrymen's Association 

American Institute of Electrical Engineers 


76 


American Institute of Mining and Metallurgical 
Engineers 

American Society of Civil Engineers 

American Society of Mechanical Engineers 

American Society of Municipal Engineers 

American Society of Testing Materials 

American Society of Agricultural Engineers 

National Council of State Boards of Engineer- 
ing Examiners 

Society for the Promotion of Engineering Edu- 
cation 

Society of Industrial Engineers 

Institute of Radio Engineers 

Western Society of Engineers 

American Institute of Architects 

American Society of Heating 6 Ventilating 
Engineers 

American Society of Refrigerating Engineers 

National Association of Practical Refrigerating 
Engineers 


AIR CONDITIONING CONFERENCE 

Dr. Baldwin M. Woods, chairman of the com- 
mittee on Air Conditioning Conference to be held 
February 9th and 10th, reports that good progress 
is being made with the program. Аз at present 
planned the meetings on February 9th will be held 
on the campus of the University of California, 
Berkeley, and those of the 10th in the Civic Audi- 
torium, San Francisco. The morning program on 
the 9th will be devoted to the scientific background 
of air conditioning. Papers are in preparation on 
subjects such as the following: the basic factors 
in air conditioning; the physiological, psycholog- 
ical determination of comfort; temperature lag in 
dwellings. etc. The afternoon session will prob- 
ably be devoted to air cooling. Economic climatic 
and equipment factors entering into air condition- 
ing will receive consideration. 

Luncheon and dinner meetings will be held 
either on the campus or nearby. At the dinner 
meeting it is planned to have a subject of general 
interest presented, 

For the session of Friday the topics are: in the 
morning, heating systems and in the afternoon, 
commercial and operative problems of air condi- 
tioning. The committee on arrangements includes, 
in addition to Dr. Woods, the following officers 
of the Society: William M. Moody, Carl A. Rietz, 
Sam R. Dows and Albert P. Hahn. 


BOOK OF 100 HOMES 
Samuel Cabot, Inc. of Boston, Massachusetts, 
have issued a new brochure called "The Book of 
100 Homes”, dealing with the preservation and 
beautification of homes. Тре illustrations are ex- 
ceptionally fine. 


The Architect and Engineer, January, 1933 


MONEL METAL itis: xiceet any 


is the accepted material for soda fountains and lunch-room equipment, just as it 


is the universal metal for food service equipment in leading hotels and restau- 


rants throughout the country. 


CORROII RON [Acid Resisting Iron] 


is the accepted material for draining waste lines. CORROSIRON meets all 


State and Municipal specifications for drain lines from school laboratories and 


chemistry rooms. 


Pacific Foundry Company Ltd. 
Pacific Metals Company Ltd. 


470 East Third St. 
LOS ANGELES 


BOOK REVIEWS 
{Concluded from Page 64] 
ACOUSTICS AND ARCHITECTURE — By 
Paul E. Savine, Ph.D. (Riverbank Labora- 
tories). Published by McGraw-Hill Book 
Co., Inc., 320 West 42nd Street, New York 
City. Price $3.50. 

A very complete and concise technical treatise 
on sound in buildings and the application of con- 
trolling noise. A valuable feature is the treat- 
ment of sound absorbing properties of normal in- 
terior furnishings. 

In general the book is divided into two com- 
plete sections, the first dealing with the physics 
of sound, the second with the problem of the 
control of sound. 

Theaters, churches, hospitals and auditoriums 
are fully discussed, and their insulation against 
undesirable noise and enhancing of their acoustics 
thoroughly treated. A very valuable book to all 
acoustical engineers and architects who must re- 
alize the importance of a scientific treatment of a 
great problem of the modern city. 


GEO. W. KELHAM REELECTED 
George W. Kelham, architect, has been re- 
elected president of the San Francisco Industrial 
Association, it was announced, following the an- 


The Architect and Engineer, January. 1933 


3100 Nineteenth St. 
SAN FRANCISCO 


551 Fifth Ave. 
NEW YORK 


nual meeting of the board of directors. Other 
officers are А. Emory Wishon, vice-president; 
Robert G. Hooker, Jr., secretary; George R. Gay, 
treasurer. Albert E. Boynton was re-elected man- 
aging director. 


CREATIVE ARCHITECTURE 
Rudolph Schaeffer and Wm. Glynn of San 


Francisco are arranging a course in "Fundament- 
als of Creative Architecture" for architects, inter- 
ior decorators, teachers and others, starting Jan- 
uary 30. 


OAKLAND RESIDENCE 
Ray F. Keefer, 770 Wesley Avenue, Oakland, 
has completed plans for a two story, eleven room, 
frame and stucco residence, to be built at 33 Bowl- 
ing Drive, Oakland, for William Boyd at an ap- 
proximate cost of $12,000. 


MONTEREY PUBLIC BUILDING 
William O. Raiguel and T. J. Ryland have been 
commissioned to prepare plans for a Hall of Rec- 
ords building at Monterey to cost $50,000. Funds 
are to be available from a private bequest. 


м 
PST 


78 


v 


THE 
FOUNDATION 
PROBLEMS 


e in e 
San Francisco 
Are described by a committee of 
distinguished engineers in a valu- 
e able book just published by the ә 
SAN FRANCISCO SECTION 


AMERICAN SOCIETY 


OF CIVIL ENGINEERS 


( No architect or engineer should 
be without this complete and de- 
pendable analysis of the soil con- 
ditions in the San Francisco Bay 
Region. Several years were con- 
sumed in compiling data and pre- 
paring this report. An article by 
Mr. А. A. Brown, chairman of 
the committee that prepared the 
report, is published on page 55 in 
this issue. It gives the reader 
some idea of the importance of 
the data contained in the report. 


(С Copies of the book may be 


procured from the secretary- 


treasurer: 


HAROLD B. HAMMILL 


381 BUSH STREET 


The price is 


$6.00 


SAN FRANCISCO 


PLENTY OF PLAY AHEAD 

А vast change will take place in buildings, and 
"this change will be not only in style but in kind," 
it is declared in a report of the Committee on In- 
dustrial Relations of the American Institute of 
Architects, of which William Orr Ludlow is chair- 
man. 

Breaking away from the traditional forms of 
architecture will bring about the change in style, 
and the increase in leisure time will create a de- 
mand for the kind of building that leisure time will 
need," according to the report, predicting an era 
of great construction activity. 

“The kind of building that will be required first 
will certainly not be the skyscraper or the factory; 
dwellings and institutional buildings, schools, hos- 
pitals, churches, and similar non-commercial build- 
ings will probably lead the way. 

"There wll be, however, a new factor in the 
situation that will mean great building along an- 
other line. The new factor is shorter hours of 
labor and longer hours of leisure. А ‘five-day 
week' is practically an accomplished fact, and per- 
haps the ‘four-day week’ is just around the cor- 
ner, for we shall keep on inventing ingenious 
machinery to replace hand work. 

"Whether the outcome is 'five days' or 'four 
days’, the average man and woman will have an 
unprecedented amount of leisure time that is going 
to be filled with recreation and amusement. Al- 
ready the automobile has nearly revolutionized our 
manner of living, and it will be the means of mak- 
ing the greatest use of out-of-doors and the build- 
ings that go with it. The time is not far away 
when the heart of our great cities will be aban- 
doned as places for residence, amusement, and 
shopping. and will be given over to office build- 
ings, centers for the distribution of freight and 
passengers, by rail bus and airplane. 

"Amusements, shopping, and residence are al- 
ready beginning the process of decentralization, as 
one can readily see by the establishment in subur- 
ban towns of great branches of our finest depart- 
ment stores, of elaborate moving picture houses 
and legitimate theaters; by the popularity of out- 
of-town apartment houses, and even in these 
times, when there is apparently no money for 
building, people have found money for building 
private residences in suburbs and country. 

"City congestion reached its limit in 1929, and 
the many nostrums which simply seemed to make 
the disease worse are giving away to the obvious 
cure—taking the people away from the city and 
not into it. It is probable that skyscrapers will 
not be built for many a long day—perhaps never. 
We are going to turn our attention to parks, 
municipal and national, and to the building of 
swimming pools, outdoor gymnasiums, and coun- 
try hotels. 


The Architect and Engineer, January, 1933 


“The additional leisure will also promote build- 
ings of many sorts for indoor recreation and 
amusement. Theaters and movie houses will flour- 
ish, great gymnasia for football, baseball, tennis, 
skating and the like will be built to make outdoor 
sports possible indoors, for winter and at night. 
Our colleges, schools, hospitals and charitable in- 
stitutions are even now at full capacity, and better 
times and more available money will bring about 
a great expansion of these and the new housing 
necessary to accommodate them. 

"Wiping out the Eighteenth Amendment, with- 
out the return of the saloon, but with more gen- 
eral leisure, may well bring about the European 
way of drinking, and we shall be building beer 
gardens, dance pavilions, and music halls; and, 
of course, we shall do it in the American way— 
on a great scale, with very big buildings. 

"We shall also build many straight highways 
for travel and traffic, and winding roads of scenic 
beauty for pleasure driving. Landscaping, plant- 
ing, flowers, bridges, pavilions for rest, recreation 
and refreshment, public play-grounds, and golf 
courses, will of course accompany these in ever 
increasing numbers. 

"What the effect of all this will be upon us as 
a people is another question, its answer depending 
in a great measure, perhaps, on whether we build 
along with our recreational facilities more schools, 
churches, libraries, and charitable institutions, and 
whether we rebuild our slums with decent habita- 
tions. 


"But architects, engineers, city planners, land- 
scape architects, builders, park boards, and public 
officials will do well to think a little in advance 
of the inevitable trend of affairs. They should 
prepare for great building activity, taking account 
of our rapidly changing conditions and probable 
mode of living, so that whatever is done shall not 
be done in the costly haphazard fashion of former 
days, but shall be planned with careful study and 
comprehensive scheming for the greatest economic 
use and the most adequate future development." 


CERTIFIED WALNUT VENEERS 

The American Walnut Manufacturers Associa- 
tion have taken a constructive step forward in the 
certified grading of walnut veneers in the estab- 
lishment of their veneer inspection service. 

Since the Association represents seventy per- 
cent of the manufacturers of walnut veneer in the 
United States, it will, under this new service, be 
able to guarantee uniform production, 

Full details as to the methods of inspection and 
certifying grades of veneer, can be obtained on 
application to the Association's office at 610 South 
Michigan Avenue, Chicago. 


The Architect and Engineer, January, 1933 


+ 


м [Ge 


THESE BOOKS WILL 
INTEREST YOU 


AIRPORTS: THEIR LOCATION, 
ADMINISTRATION, AND 
LEGAL BASIS 


By H. V. Нгввакр, М. МсСілмтоск 
апа F. В. WILLIAMS 


"The book undoubtedly offers аз com- 
plete and informative a compilation of 
airport material] as has been published in 
this country." —A viation. 


BUILDING HEIGHT, BULK, 
AND FORM 


Ву С. B. Forp 


“Mr. Ford's study is a summary of prac 
tically all the known findings on the sub- 
ject."— The Architectural Forum. 


NEIGHBORHOODS OF 
SMALL HOMES 


Ву К. WurrrEN and Т, Apams 


“It is decidedly the finest piece of work 
on the subject that has been published.” 
—National Real Estate Journal. 


URBAN LAND USES 
By Н. BARTHOLOMEW 


Just published (September, 1932). A 
valuable contribution to scientific zoning 
practice. For the purposes of this study, 
Mr. Bartholomew has determined the 
amounts of land actually in use for parks, 
streets, stores, houses, and other urban 
purposes in typical American cities where 
he has been employed as a city planning 
consultant. On the basis of his findings, 
he suggests the desirable amounts of 
land to be allotted for these purposes in 
cities in various population groups under 
300,000. 


These four rcports are attractively 
bound in uniform volumes, fully illus- 
trated and priced at $3.50 a copy, 
postpaid. 


Harvard University Press 


Cambridge, Mass. 


Я 


80 


BUILD 
WEOL 


PROPERLY designed and well built 
building is a credit to any city and 


a worth while investment for its owner. 


Such structures are the STAND- 


ARD Он. BuirpixNG, MATSON 


Buirpixc, Four-Firry Sut- 


TER STREET, STOCK EXCHANGE, 
S. Е. Base Barr Park, Mirrs 


Tower, OPERA 


VETERANS’ 


House and 


Memoria and 


other notable structures — all 


built or supervised by — 


Lindgren & Swinerton, Inc. 


Standard Oil Building 
San Francisco 


Complete 
the Circle of Protection 


LIFE INSURANCE 
plus 
LIFE INSURANCE [RUST 


Life insurance is good—a 
man should take out all 


he can afford, But don’t 
stop there. Remember— 
life insurance provides 
money—but zot the abil- 
ity 10 manage it. 


The Life Insurance Trust 
fills this lack — completes 
the circle of protection. It 


is an arrangement be- 
tween you and the bank 
providing for the collec- 
tion and investment of 
your life insurance estate, 
the payment of income to 
your dependents, and ihe 
final disbursement of 
principal, all exactly as 
you direct. Call or write 
for details. 


TRUST DEPARTMENT 


Wells Fargo Bank 
Union Trust Со, 


Since 1852 

Two Offices: 
Market at Montgomery and 
Market at Grant Avenue 


SAN FRANCISCO 


FUNDS FOR MODERNIZATION 


Possibilities for a quarter billion to a half billion 
dollars’ worth of new jobs are opened up by the 
decision of the building and loan associations of 
the country to use the funds they borrow from 
the Home Loan Banks to finance modernization, 
said to be needed by 75 per cent of the existing 
homes. 

The decision is reported by the United States 
Building and Loan League, on basis of a survey 
of a few days ago in which it asked building and 
loan executives all over the country what kind of 
home loans they would make with the money they 
can borrow as members of the new national home 
financing system. 

The jobs to be created will be largely in the 
building and allied trades and will come as a re- 
sult of a nation-wide extension of credit to home 
owners who want to improve, repair and modern- 
ize their dwellings. Campaigns to reduce unem- 
ployment by encouraging home improvement have 
been successful in the last year and a half wher- 
ever money was available, Ward В. Whitlock, 
Springfield, Ill., president of the league, points out, 
and now the money which the Home Loan banks 
will supply to the associations will provide financ- 
ing facilities to start home modernizing on the 
great scale which is needed. 

The associations may borrow twelve times as 
much as their stock subscription in the regional 
banks, which is set by the law at a minimum of 1 
per cent of their home mortgages. With all the 
associations in the country holding eight and a 
half billion dollars in assets, at least a billion could 
be borrowed by them when all the associations 
have joined and when the banks have raised by 
bond issues $875.000,000 in addition to the initial 
advance of $125,000,000 from the Government, it 
is pointed out. 

So little modernization has been possible in the 
last three years, the league president further 
pointed out, that 75 per cent is a very conserva- 
tive estimate on the homes now out of date. With 
this in mind, State conventions of building and 
loan associations held in many different sections 
of the country during the last month reached a 
consensus of opinion that reloaning their Home 
Loan bank's borrowings for such projects would 
be a real contribution toward recovery. Secretaries 
of State leagues of building and loan associations, 
answering a query put out by the trade publication 
of the building and loan world, show the same 
strong leaning. 

Reliable figures show that an average of 50 per 
cent of all money spent for such home repairs as 
reroofing, painting, improvement of light and ven- 
tilation facilities, the changing of architectural de- 
sign and exterior arrangements of houses, install- 


The Architect and Enginccr, January, 1933 


ing modern air cooling and insulating devices and 
general repairs to cellar, house and attic goes into 
the purses of the workmen who do the job. On this 
50 per cent basis it is estimated that something 
like $100,000,000 could be paid out in wages al- 
most as soon as financing is available for the $200,- 
000,000 demand for modernization and repairs 
reported six months ago. Within another six 
months $200,000,000 to $500,000,000 could prob- 
ably be paid to home repair workers, when the 
regional banks sell bonds on the scale anticipated. 

"Seventy-seven cities of large and moderate size 
have put on modernizing campaigns with a subse- 
quent reduction of the percentage of their unem- 
ployed anywhere from 30 to 50 per cent," says 
Mr. Whitlock. “The United States Department of 
Commerce has directed activities їп encourage- 
ment of these enterprises. It has run against one 
major difficulty, lack of financing on the part of 
thousands of home owners who really want to 
improve the value of their property by moderniz- 
ing. The Home Loan Bank funds supply the an- 
swer. 

"Low cost of building materials makes the pres- 
ent the ideal time for all families to go about im- 
proving their homes in appearance and comforts, 
and therefore in value. Repairs which cost between 
$500 and $2,500 in 1928 may be made for $350 to 
$2,000 today. 

“The gain in employment which will result from 
this financing goes beyond the group of working- 
men who would be hired to do the actual repair 
and modernizing work. The manufacturer of lum- 
ber, shingles, masonry materials, plumbing fix- 
tures, electric apparatus, paint and other requisites 
for making homes more comfortable and attractive 
will need more men to work for him to fill the or- 
ders which pile up. When men have gone back to 
work again they will be able to buy again, and so 
the cycle starts on the upgrade with the stimulus 
it has needed all along, the resumption of employ- 
ment. 

"By using the major part of their Home Loan 
Bank borrowings for such loans to home owners, 
the associations will play their part in making the 
new system a real contributor to recovery, but 
along lines of sound economics rather than along 
the carelessly thought out lines of direct loans to 
impoverished families who could not be expected 
to carry additional credit." 


HONOLULU UNIVERSITY BUILDING 

А new agriculture building will be erected this 
year on the campus of the University of Hawaii, 
according to an announcement made recently by 
David L. Crawford, president of the University. 
The building will be of reinforced concrete and 
hollow tile construction and will cost approximate- 


ly $50.000. 


The Architect and Engineer, January, 1933 


MODERNIZING 


By providing a CUTLER MAIL CHUTE. 
A building however old fashioned in 
other respects can be made as modern 
in mail service as the latest skyscraper. 
What the tenant wants is not so much 
something to look at as something to 
use in the transaction of his business. 


Full information, details, specifications 
and estimates on request. 


PRICE BUILDING SPECIALTIES, 


San Francisco, California 


CONTINENTAL BUILDING SPECIALTIES, Inc. 
Los Angeles, California 


D. E. FRYER & COMPANY, C. W. BOOST, 
Seattle, Washington Portland, Oregon 


FRYER-FORD COMPANY, 
Spokane, Washington 


CUTLER MAIL CHUTE CO. 


General Offices and Factory 


ROCHESTER, N. Y. 


HAWS 


Model 5С Drinking Fountain in brown was in- 
stalled in the offices of Dean Witter & Company, 
Porter Building, Portland, Oregon, of which 
Kent & Hass were the architects. 


- 


Model No. 5C 


HAWS SANITARY DRINKING FOUNTAIN CO. 


1808 Harmon Street, Berkeley 


$1 


52 


BUILDERS 
OF GOOD 
HOMES 


Houses designed by Kent & 


Hass, Architects, and erect- 
ed by JENSEN & PEDERSEN, 
Contractors, for the follow- 


ing owners: 


Mr. and Mrs. R. H. Swayne 
Alameda 


Mr. and Mrs. Lloyd Swayne 
Alameda 

Arthur C. Oppenheimer 
Alameda 


[See plate section of this issue] 


JENSEN & 
PEDERSEN 


General Contractors 
3442 Adeline Street 


O A KL AN D 


T. D. COURTRIGHT 


349 515Т STREET OAKLAND 
GENERAL CONTRACTOR 


of house for 
GEO. C. BARRY, ALAMEDA 


tea house for 
FRANK C. STRATFORD, ALAMEDA 


and alterations for the 


McHENRY HOME, OAKLAND 


all designed by 
ARCHITECTS, KENT & HAAS 


IF YOU HAVE 


Worked out the solution of an 


ARCHITECTURAL PROBLEM 


And want patent protection for the same, write 
me for an opinion on the probable patentability 
and an estimate of the cost. 


J. KAPLAN 


Washington Loan & Trust Bldg. 
Washington, D. C. 
Registered Patent. Attorney 


DEPRESSION HITS ULTRA MODERNISM 


An architectural renaissance during the next 
decade, which will introduce momentous changes 
in thought and lead to even greater progress than 
in the past, is predicted by Ernest John Russell 
of St. Louis, president of the American Institute 
of Architects. 


Architecture as an art has benefited immeasur- 
ably by the depression, Mr. Russell believes, in 
that ultra-modernism in construction has received 
a distinct setback and the architects have been 
forced to turn to more utilitarian tasks. Because 
of the economic crisis, he holds that the efforts 
of honest architectural modernists have stirred our 
imaginations, with the result that buildings will be 
inherently sincere in design and expressive of 
modern materials, methods and uses. The same 
forces, he points out, have caused the "wild en- 
thusiasts" to analyze their work with critical ex- 
actitude. 


Mr. Russell assures the nation's architects that 
efforts toward unification of the profession are 
beginning to show results and that the slow re- 
cession of the depression will provide them with 
more than enough to do. Recognition of private 
architects by the Federal government is praised 
by the Institute's president as an illustration of 
the effectiveness of concerted action in the pro- 
fession to secure the assignment of public con- 
struction work. 


Designing of small homes, organization of new 
local building congresses, economy in site plan- 
ning and housing and modernization of existing 
structures are among the many architectural activ- 
ities which Mr. Russell discusses in his report. 
He declares that "as individuals we have turned 
our attention more and more to civic activities 
with the result that some of our time has been 
pleasantly occupied and we can feel that we are 
taking our logical place as citizens to the benefit 
of our communities." 


“Those who lend money for building," he says, 
“are convinced that buildings well designed and 
of good construction are more valuable than ill- 
considered structures. Hence there arises the de- 
sire for the certification of buildings along the 
lines of design, construction, suitability for use 
and appropriateness of location. This trend, if 
carried to its logical conclusion, may result in 
still further use for the services of the trained 
architect and also may end ultimately in the prac- 
tice of requiring certificates of necessity before 
granting permits for the erection of buildings. 


“Individually and collectively we can face the 
future with the calm assurance that there will be 


The Architect and Engineer, January, 1933 


plenty to do, and the deep conviction that we will 
be better prepared to serve our clients." 

The healthy condition of modern architectural 
work is evidenced by the printed and oral dis- 
cussions regarding it that continue unabated, Mr. 
Russell declares, pointing out that it is a "live 
subject" animated by craftsmen with original 
ideas and high ideals. 


" Architectural modernists,” he asserts, "deserve 
praise for their efforts to stir our imaginations 
and this will result in buildings that are inher- 
ently honest in their design and expressive of 
modern materials, methods and uses. The wild 
enthusiasts have had opportunity to analyze more 
accurately. The result will be a reinforcement of 
the underlying principles of the splendid works 
of the past which are noted for their sincerity and 
beauty. 


“The modernists have awakened in us the real- 
ization that too great stress has been laid on 
blindly following precedent and that the profes- 
sion has failed to recognize the revolution that 
has taken place in building materials and орега- 
tions. 


“We should analyze our problems in the spirit 
of the scientist. Our goal is far ahead, but there 
are evidences that a few strong men have grasped 
the fundamentals and are training themselves for 
work that will serve as a guide and an inspira- 
tion. By the next decade there should be a mo- 
mentous change in our habits of architectural 
thinking and an indication of even greater prog- 
ress. 


The growth of the Construction League, 
headed by Robert D. Kohn of New York City, 
past president of the American Institute of Archi- 
tects, is another of the outstanding developments 
of the year listed by Mr. Russell. Its meetings, 
he says, have increased the understanding of the 
internal problems of the construction industry 
and developed concerted action. Its principal 
activities during the past twelve months have 
been the organization of the National Committee 
for Trade Recovery, the support of national and 
state legislation to aid in the recovery of the build- 
ing industry and general support of those cities 
and states engaged in the effort to secure ade- 
guate financing for self-liquidating projects. 


“Its beneficent influence should increase year by 
year," Mr. Russell comments, “and should finally 
result in the recognition of construction, the sec- 
ond largest industry in the country, as a national 
unit, thus fulfilling the dreams of men who have 
been keen observers of the ineffectiveness of the 
industry in the past." 

Little possibility of action on the Green bill, 
making mandatory the employment of private 


The Architect and Engineer, January, 1933 


1044-1058 Forty-seventh Avenue 
OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 
Telephone: FR uitvale 8305-8306 


Product of 
CALIFORNIA SHADE CLOTH CO. 
1710 San Bruno Avenue, San Francisco 
Manufacturers of 


QUALITY HAND MADE SHADE CLOTH 
IN ALL GRADES 


Wholesale Distributors 
SLOANE-BLABON LINOLEUM 


Oil Heaters 

Relief Valves 
Oil-Burner Governors 
Little Giant Improved 
Gas Burners Oil Barners 

Gas Burning Equipment Oil Pumping Sets 
Vacuum Pump Governors ОЙ Valves 

Vacuum Regulating Oil Strainers 


Pump Governors 

Salety Pump Governors 

Automatic Gas Regulat- 
ing Valves 


Valves Steam Oil Strainers 
Continuous Flow Steam Duplex Oil Pumps 
Thermostats Rotary Oil Pumps 
Reducing Valves Boiler Feed Pumps 

gb Boiler Feed-Water Water Heaters 

Regulators Oil Meters 


VAUGHN -G. E. WITT CO., Engineers 
C. W. VAUGHN, President and Mauager 
MANUFACTURERS AND DISTRIBUTORS 


4224-28 Hollis $1. Phone OL ympie 6084 
Emeryville, Oakland, Calif. 


VENETIAN BLINDS 


Control light and air without 
draft or glare 


For public buildings, 
offices, stores and homes, 
in colors to suit. 


GUNN, CARLE & CO. 


20 Potrero Ave. UNderhill 5480 


San Francisco 


83 


The new Decatur 
De Luxe Lavatory, 
illustrated here, is 
representative of 
the MUELLER 
line of quality vit- 
reous china. 


MUELLER CO. 
Decatur, Ill. 
San Francisco Branch: 
1072-76 Howard St. 


The Modern Way— 
BUILD WITH STEEL 


Protect your Investment from 
Fire and Quake 
Structural Steel for Buildings 
and Bridges 


JUDSON.PACIFIC CO. 


609 MISSION STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 
DOuglas 4460 


Plants, San Francisco and Oakland 


MARBLE CLASS 


A new decorative building material of 

exceptional beauty—looks like genuine 

marble with its innumerable delicate 
veins and royal colors. 


For New and Remodeled Build- 
ings, Store Fronts, Hotel Lobbies, 7 


Office Buildings, Vestibules, Etc. 


MaeGRUER & COMPANY 


266 Tehama Street San Francisco 


W.8 J. SLOANE 


Established 1843 


RUGS : CARPETS 
LINOLEUMS 
WINDOW SHADES 
Phone: GArfield 2827 
FURNITURE 


DRAPERIES 
Estimates Gladly Submitted 


216-228 SUTTER STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 


84 


architects on government work, is seen by Mr. 
Russell, since the measure is still in the hands of 
the Congressional Committee. It will be intro- 
duced again at the next session of Congress on 
March 4, perhaps with modifications that will 
make it more acceptable to the incoming Adminis- 
tration. 


Other legislative activities, in which the Ameri- 
can Institute of Architects is aligned with many 
other organizations protesting against the govern- 
ment's competition with private business, are sum- 
marized by Mr. Russell. Chief among them is the 
work of Louis LaBeaume of St. Louis, chairman 
of the Institute's Committee on Public Works, 
who has appeared before Congress in behalf of 
the bill regarding employment of private archi- 
tects on government projects and also before the 
Shannon House Investigating Committee, which 
is surveying the activities of the government in 
relation to private business. 


"The net results of the Institute's activities in 
endeavoring to secure recognition of the profes- 
sion by various agencies of the government," Mr. 
Russell observes, "are disappointing as compared 
to the ambitions of the profession, while on the 
other hand they are encouraging as they indi- 
cate the potentiality of a national organization 
working as a unit for the recognition it believes 
its due. 


“In order to reinforce its efforts, particularly in 
national matters, the Institute has encouraged an 
affiliation with existing state associations of archi- 
tects. This possible solidarity of the profession 
will be of substantial assistance to the Institute in 
its national legislation campaigns, while the state 
associations will be strengthened in their dealings 
with the state and municipal authorities by the 
Institute, in all matters that pertain to the benefit 
of the entire profession.” 


The design of small homes and the need for 
modernization in existing structures, Mr. Russell 
believes, furnish the widest national field now for 
the talents and industry of the architect. The 
president of the Institute feels that enough has 
not been done in these lines. 


“The Institute,” he concludes, “is gratified to 
find that local building congresses are able to re- 
port substantial progress and that new congresses 
are being organized. 


“The design of small homes presents a prob- 
lem that has not been solved satisfactorily by the 
architectural profession. At the last convention 
a committee was appointed to consider one phase 
of this subject, but later it was agreed that it was 
better to cover, if possible, the entire field even 


The Architect and Engineer, January, 1933 


including small farm buildings. The Institute 
readily acquiesced in this point of view and has 
hopes that the fundamental principles pertaining 
to this problem will be formulated in such a man- 
ner as to be satisfactory to the profession with 
the resultant benefits to the public. 

"We have been stopped largely from creating 
designs for new buildings and are beginning to 
realize that existing structures offer possibilities 
undreamed of. А great majority of such struc- 
tures are in need of repairs and many could be 
modernized to the advantage of the owners. This 
offers a comparatively untouched field to the archi- 
tects and yet it is logical for them to till it vigor- 
ously. 

"There is a growing conviction in the profes- 
sion that they should serve as consultants to those 
who have building problems no matter how small. 
Architects would do well to let it be known that 
they may be consulted about minor matters and 
can give assurances that the fees for such con- 
sultation would be moderate enough to meet with 
approval from the clients." 


SCHOOL HOUSE PLANNING 

Authority to establish a rule making it manda- 
tory to employ certified architects for the archi- 
tectural work of the Division of School House 
Planning, State of California, is vested solely in 
the Department of Education, Attorney General 
U. S. Webb has ruled. 

In answer to a query from the State Board of 
Architectural Examiners, Webb declared that 
such a rule could be made if the Department 
deemed it necessary for the expeditious handling 
of the work of the division. He said it was not 
within the power of the Division to establish such 
a requirement on its own authority. 

The Attorney General also advised the board 
that the wording of the school code did not com- 
pel the Department of Education to employ certi- 
fied architects, although the word "architect" is 
used in one of the sections. This term, Webb 
says, was not intended to refer specifically to the 
definition of architect given in the Architectural 
Act which limits its use to "those persons holding 
certificates from the Board of Architectural Ex- 
aminers." 


FRANCIS D. RUTHERFORD 

Francis D. Rutherford, 50, widely known arch- 
itect, native of Salt Lake City, dropped dead at 
Santa Monica, January 10, while dining in a cafe. 

Mr. Rutherford designed buildings which now 
house several southern California newspapers and 
also some 40 structures in the Santa Monica bay 
district, including schools. He once won first prize 
in a national architectural contest. 


The Architect and Engincer. January, 1933 


ARCHITECTS, We Specialize in 


SOUND CONTROL 


and 


Insulation Materials 


E. K. WOOD LUMBER CO. 
Lumber and Millwork 


SAN FRANCISCO - OAKLAND - LOS ANGELES 


Recent Contracts Completed— | 


FORD ASSEMBLY PLANTS AT 
SEATTLE, LONG BEACH 
AND RICHMOND 


Clinton Construction Company 
of California 


Builders and Managers 


of Construction 


923 FOLSOM STREET SAN FRANCISCO 
Telephone SUtter 3440 


WALKER - WILKESON 
SANDSTONE 


Sawed Stone 


Building Stone Rip Rap 
The Nation's Finest Stone 
HOYT M. LESHER 
California Representative 


503 Market St., San Francisco 
Telephone: DOuglas 6436 


Walker Cut Stone 
Plant: Tacoma, Wash. 


Quarries at 


Wilkeson, Wash. 


KAWNEER 
MODERNISTIC CONSTRUCTION 
FOR 
Topay’s STORE FRONT 


Through years of experience Kawneer 
craftsmen have acquired the art of ren- 
dering in metal distinctive and efficient 
store fronts of any size or design. 


KAWNEER MFG. CO. 


BERKELEY CALIFORNIA 


85 


Gladding Bros. 
Mfo. Со. 


BURNED CLAY PRODUCTS 
ROOF TILE 
COMMON AND FACE BRICK 
FLOOR TILE 
VITRIFIED SEWER PIPE 
DRAIN TILE 
CHIMNEY PIPE 
FLUE LINING 
PLANT AND OFFICE: 


THIRD AND KEYES STREETS 
Ballard 7570 San Jose, Calif. 


Every Purpose 


637 Minna Street, San Francisco, Calif. 
Phone: MArket 3612 


AMERICAN 


MARBLE 
COMPANY 


Office and Factory 
Swift Ave. and Canal 
P. O. Box 578 
South San Francisco, Calif. 
SUtter 2840 South San Francisco 161 


JOSEPH MUSTO 
SONS-KEENAN 
COMPANY 


MARBLE 


and 


ONYX 


535 NORTH POINT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 
1801 5. SOTO STREET 
LOS ANGELES 


— — 


86 


ANCESTORS OF THE 1929 
DEPRESSION 


Editorial in Roads and Streets 


ТІНЕ Chicago Tribune, in a re- 
I cent editorial article, quoted 
trom the writings of public men 
and from newspapers, five differ- 
ent paragraphs, each of which re- 
lated to distressing economic con- 
ditions during the panics of 1824, 
1837, 1857, 1873 and 1893. Any 
one of the quotations was equally 
applicable to present conditions, 
for all were extremely lugutrious. 


Therefore, when we read that 
the present depression is “the 
worst ever,’ we should hesitate 
about accepting the statement un- 
less by "ever" the writer means a 
period somewhat less than two 
generations. 


The theory that "technological 
unemployment" is the cause of this 
depression is not a new explana- 
tion of depressions, although the 
name that it now goes by is emi- 
nently new. There has been "tech- 
nological unemployment” here and 
there ever since Watt gave to the 
world an economical steam engine. 
Probably that sort of unemploy- 
ment started when a Chinaman 
invented a wheelbarrow. The an- 
cient nature of unemployment con- 
sequent upon invention is соп- 
ceded by all economists, we be- 
lieve, but recent revivalists of this 
theory of hard times argue that 
during the decade ending in 1929 
labor-saving devices were design- 
ed and installed at a rate so un- 
precedented as to constitute an 
economic revaluation. This is not 
true. 


The "technocrats" have been 
particularly active in printing data 
showing how rapidly workmen 
have been replaced by “robots” of 
one sort or another. It is note- 
worthy however, that the advo- 
cates of general curtailment of 
output rely upon individual in- 
stances and upon facts relating to 
a few industries, to prove their 
case. The same sort of "proof" 
was offered a century ago, and all 


GUILFO Y 
Cornice Works 


General Sheet Metal 
W ork 
Skylights 
Fire Doors 


GUILFOY CORNICE WORKS 
1234 Howard Street 
San Francisco 
Phone: MArket 0561 


@ Invites your inspec- 
tion of a choice col- 
lection of hand- 
made 17th and 18th 


century furniture. 


508 SUTTER STREET 


San Francisco 


Del Monte 
WHITE SAND 
Fan Shell — Beach 


WASHED IN FRESH WATER 
DRIED BY STEAM 


CLEAN BONE DRY 


Qao 


Del Monte Properties Company 
Phone GArfield 4533 


401 Crocker Building San Francisce 


Specify 


DICKEY 


CLAY 
PRODUCTS 


Dickey Mastertile Face Brick 

Partition Tile Fire Brick 

Drain Tile Paving Brick 
Fireproofing Tile Wall Coping 

Floor Tile Flue Lining 

Common Brick Dickey Flashing Blocke 


W. S. DICKEY CLAY MEG. 


COMPANY 
SAN FRANCISCO 


The Architect and Engineer, January, 1933 


McClintic-Marshall 
Corporation 


Steel 
Corporation 


Subsidiary of Би 


TEM 


Bethlehem nu 


STEEL BRIDGES 
and BUILDINGS 


215 WEST SIXTH STREET 
LOS ANGELES 


2050 BRYANT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


SMITH 
Lumber Company 


OF OAKLAND 


Lumber and Mill Work 


19TH AVE. AND ESTUARY 
Oakland, California 
FRuitvale 3174 


ARMCO 


Special Analysis 
Iron and Steel 
Sheets and Plates 
For Building Construction 


e 
THE AMERICAN ROLLING MILL CO, 
540 Tenth Street, San Francisco 
Phone: MArket 3495 
32 W. Connectient Street, Seattle 
с Specify Armco Sheets and 
&МСо Plates for all purposes 
V, where durable, finely- 
finished construction is 
required. 


TRANSIT-MIX 
CONCRETE 


A Perfect-Blend 


Material 


Golden Gate Atlas 
Materials Co. 


Sixteenth and Harrison Streets 
San Francisco 
Phone HEmlock 7020 


The Architect and Engineer, January, 1933 


that was wrong about it was that 
desire for goods and services out- 
runs the means with which to pur- 
chase them. Let a family double 
its real income and how often does 
it fail to spend it? Double it again, 
and is there any difficulty in find- 
ing ways of spending it? Not if 
the history of the past century is 
any criterion, not if the families 
that now have an income of $10,- 
000 a year are composed of the 
same stuff that goes to make fami- 
lies having incomes of $2,000. 


Technological unemployment 
does occur at intervals in every 
class of industry but seldom in 
many classes simultaneously. 
What is more important, human 
wants expand as fast as real in- 
come expands; and since average 
real income depends upon average 
per capita output of goods, it is 
an economic error to attribute de- 
pressions to general overproduc- 
tion. 


During the boom of 1928 and 
1929 when production was at a 
peak, where was there a piling 
up of many unconsumed goods? 
Even the most over-expanded of 
the large industries, namely farm- 
ing, was not suffering from accum- 
ulated surpluses. Farm prices were 
said to be too low to be profitable; 
but when was anything else ever 
said by the average farmer? Taken 
as a whole, neither manufacturers 
nor merchants were overstocked 
when the collapse came in 1929. 
What collapsed? Store shelves? 
No. Grain bins? No. Automobile 
storehouses? No. What collapsed 
was credit. There had been a 
drastic shrinkage of credit on reai 
estate projects in many cities ever 
two years prior to the collapse of 
credit on Wall Street. The grand 
collapse of credit on securities 
bought on margin was immedi- 
ately followed by a collapse in 
bank credits, which was further 
aggravated by the failure of more 
than 2,000 American banks. The 
calling of bank loans forced the 
sale of securities at still lower 
prices, and this in turn resulted 
in the calling of more loans. There 


YOUNG 
& 
HORSTMEYER 


GENERAL 


CONTRACTORS 


461 Market Street 


San Francisco 


Phone SUtter 6257—58 
Pani B. Young A. L. Horstmeyer 


RAY COOK 
MARBLE CO. 


IMPORTED AND DOMESTIC 
MARBLES 


For Building Construction 


Factory and Office: 
FOOT OF POWELL ВТ., OAKLAND 
Phone Pledmont 1009 


$ 


MERCURY PRESS 


We Print 
The ARCHITECT and 
ENGINEER 


“A Thing of Beauty 
Is a Joy Forever” 


942 HOWARD STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


Grinnell Automatic 


SPRINKLER 


GRINNELL COMPANY 
OF THE PACIFIC 


ENGINEERS AND 
CONTRACTORS 


VALVES, PIPE and FITTINGS 
601 BRANNAN STREET 


San Francisco 


87 


Phone DOuglas 1120-1121 


Larsen and Larsen 


General Contractors 


v 


629 BRYANT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


FORDERER 
CORNICE WORKS 


Copper Roofs 
Galvanized Iron Work 
Elevator Doors 


269 Potrero Avenue, San Francisco 
Phone HEmlock 4100 


Robert W. Hunt Company 
ENGINEERS 
Inspection - Tests - Consultation 
Inspection and Tests of Structural 
Steel, Reinforcing Steel 
and Cement. 

Ficld Inspection and Supervision 
of Consruction of Steel and 
Concrcte Structures. 
Cement, Concrete, Chemical, Met- 
allurgical, X-Ray and Physical 
Laboratories. 

Chicago - New York - Pittsburgh 
АП Large Cities 
San Francisco, 251 Kearny Street 


Chicago 


HOSPITAL 


SILENT CALL 
SIGNAL SYSTEMS 


GARNETT YOUNG AND CO. 
Pacific Coast Sales Engineers 
390 FOURTH ST, SAN FRANCISCO 


Seottle Los Angeles Portland 


88 


were "vicious circles" without end, 
but observe that in nearly every 
instance they existed mainly be- 
cause both ordinary business and 
speculation are largely conducted 
upon borrowed money. 


Overproduction of credit has 
apparently been far more detri- 
mental to prosperity than any 
other cause, perhaps than all other 
causes put together. Ап overpro- 
duction of any given class of 
goods usually rights itself because 
of the unprofitable prices that re- 
sult. But overproduction of credit 
is apt to become general, and 
when it reaches that stage it rights 
itself by a general collapse of all 
business 


STEEL HOUSES 

In order to open up a new mar- 
ket for steel the United States 
Steel Corporation is preparing to 
issue a guidebook to house build- 
ers, according to F. T. Llewellyn, 
Consulting Engineer of the Cor- 
poration. Їп an address before 
the American Institute of Steel 
Construction. Mr. Llewellyn de- 
scribed the results of a survey re- 
cently made by a steel house com- 
mittee. The survey embraced 56 
systems of construction which 
were classified, according to the 
type of steel members used, into 
six groups as follows: 


1. Rolled Shapes as Received from 
Mill. 


2. Rolled Shapes Fabricated into 
Members. 


3. Sheet or Strip Formed into 


Port Costa Select 
Common Brick 


Specified and used on 
Residence of 
ALFRED J. LUNDBERG 
Oakland 
KENT AND HAAS 
Architects 


PORT COSTA 


BRICK WORKS 
Sixth and Berry Streets 
San Francisco 


REG. Ц. S. PAT. OFF. 


“More than a 


building paper” 


ww 


THE SISALKRAFT CO. 
205 West Wacker Drive 
(Canal Station) Chicago, Ill. 


55 New Montgomery Street 
San Francisco, Calif. 


CRANE 


High Class Plumbing 
Fixtures 


ww 


all EL 
ALL PRINCIPAL Coast CITIES 


THE TORMEY 


COMPANY 


GENERAL PAINTERS 
AND DECORATORS 


Phone WA inut 3639 


563 FULTON STREET 


San Francisco 


W. H. PICARD, Inc. 


PLUMBING, HEATING, 
VENTILATING and 
POWER PLANTS 


5656 College Avenue 
5662 Keith Avenue 


Oakland California 
Phones РІ edmont 9004-9005 


The Architect and Епдіпсег, January, 1933 


OCEAN SHORE 


IRoN WORKS 


550-558 EIGHTH STREET 
МА rket 0462-0463 


California 


San Francisco 


b 4 
STEAM BOILERS 
STEEL TANKS 


SMOKE STACKS 
e WATER e 
e HEATERS e 


LUXOR 


WINDOW SHADES 


Translucent Shading 
of highest count 
cambric 


William Volker & Co. 
631 Howard Street 
San Francisco 


CLERVI 
MARBLE CO. 


MANUFACTURING CONTRACTORS 


Foreign and Domestic 
Marbles 


Interior & Exterior Buildings 


Office & Mill, 1721 San Bruno Ave. 


Phone MI ssion 6625 
SAN FRANCISCU, CAL. 


Members ( Metal Lumber). 

4. Rolled Shapes, Sheet or Strip 
Fabricated into Panel Framing 
Units. 


5. Sheet or Strip Fabricated into 
Panel Filling Units. 


6. Miscellaneous and Foreign 
Practice. 


The survey indicated that the 
potential demand for one and two 
familiy houses in the United States 
is the equivalent of 300,000 six- 
room residences per year. If fram- 
ed of steel this would require 2,- 
250,000 tons of small rolled steel 
shapes per year. The fabrication 
of this material seems better suited 
to the smaller rather than the 
larger bridge shops, and in some 
cases it may be done more advan- 
tageously at the site. 


'The survey showed that the 
conditions attending the construc- 
tion of residences have very little 
in common with those fields where- 
in multiple production methods 
are applicable, such as the manu- 
facture and marketing of automo- 
biles. While there may be some 
development of the standardized 
type of house, it is believed that 
the principal demand for steel will 
be in connection with houses of 
individual design, which, however, 
may utilize certain standardized 
units. 


A detailed analysis of systems 
of steel framing that have been 
successfully employed disclosed 
the fact that their safe and eco- 
nomical design differs from the 
conventional methods accepted in 


Hardwood Trim 
ALFRED р LUNDBERG 


House, Lakeshore High- 
lands, Oakland 


by 


OSTLUND & JOHNSON 
1901 Bryant Street 


San Francisco 
Phone MArket 5300 


The Architect and Engineer, January, 1933 


N vs жау” 
‘St ЖТА 
\ МАМ 


vi ess 


he FINK 


WS 7 e" 
У: ©. 
ИРА М à 
ILER 
22%, 
: x r^ 


a AN 
Aud NG ‘CONTRACTORS 
жүзгін DETE INSTALLATIONS © 


vem jpANK- RESTAURANT -¢ ore: 


PIX TURES 
SECTIONAL Mikel MA 
‘Telephone’ KE any Біз” [ 
D 
* 9% 2 


S 


5 
ud М. \ ES S 


BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 


Recent Contracts Completed 
Y. W. C. A. Building 
San Francisco 

Library Building 
Berkeley 

Post Office Building 
Oakland 

City Hospital 
Palo Alto 

Home of the Blind 
Berkeley 


K. E. PARKER CO., INC. 
135 South Park San Francisco 
Phone KE arny 6640 


Phone GArfield 1164 


Hunter & Hudson 


Consulting Engineers 


DESIGNERS OF HEATING 
AIR CONDITIONING 
VENTILATING AND WIRING 
SYSTEMS, MECHANICAL 
AND ELECTRICAL EQUIP- 
MENT OF BUILDINGS 
erd 
41 SUTTER STREET 


ROOM 710 PIF 
San Francisco California 


Specified by KENT & Hass 


Manufactured by 


UNITED STFATES 
LIME PRODUCTS CORP. 


85 Second Sireet San Francisco 


59 


McNEAR BRICK 


FOR 


Beauty and 
Permanence 
(Cm 0) 
McNear Brick Company 


Main Office and Factories 
McNEAR POINT 
San Rafael, Calif. 

San Francisco Office and Yard 


417 BERRY STREET 


Architectural 
Metals 


Mouldings - Grilles 


Tubing ~- Ornaments 
of ett 
Steel >> Bronze 


Aluminum 


BRAUN-STEEPLE CO.,LTD. 


636 Potrero Avenue 
San Francisco 


1203 E. 8th Street 
Los Angeles 


APEX 
Blo-Air Fan Heaters 


Portable and Wall Typee 
1320 watts to 4000 watts 
Thermostat Control if Desired 


Better. 


Tests 
show 50% 
greater 
temperature 
rise in 
living 


zone. 


Blo-Air Heaters use a fan to circu- 
late the air instead of depending проп 
the slow process of gravity circulation. 
Instant heat and a greater amount in 
the lower living zone of the room, with 
the ssme consumption. Fan can_ be 
used without the heat for cooling. 
Switches easily accessible at top. Can 
be installed under windows. 

There is a complete line of Apex Alr 
and Water Heaters. 


APEX Manufacturing Company 


Oakland, California 
Distributars 
SANDOVAL SALES CO. 
557 Market St., San Francisco 


APEX SALES CO. 
1855 Industrial St., Los Angeles 


90 


tier building design in three re- 
spects: 


1. From the standpoint of mutual 
anchorage or support there is 
greater interdependence be- 
tween the steel wall framing 
of a residence and the other 
materials which envelop the 
frame. 


2. The scope of compression for- 
mulas now in use must be ex- 
tended to greater ratios of slen- 
derness in order to take care of 
temporary stud conditions dur- 
ing construction. 


3. Greater attention to the limits 
of deflection in floor framing is 
required. 


The speaker made the announce- 
ment that a booklet is now being 
prepared by the United States 
Steel Corporation which is іп- 
tended for wide distribution 
throughout the industry. It will 
contain rules, tables and illustra- 
tive examples that will facilitate 
a proper provision for these three 
features in the design of steel 
framed houses. 


Mr. Llewellyn's address was il- 
lustrated by 28 lantern slides de- 
picting a number of successful in- 
stallations of steel framing in resi- 
dence construction. 


PATENTED ARCHITEC- 


TURE AND BUILDINGS 


'The following patents were re- 
cently issued by the United States 
Patent Office for subjects relating 
to the arts of architecture and 
building: 


MANUFACTURED BUILDING PARTS 


А patent for building construc- 
tion was issued to Albert F. Bemis 
of Newton, Mass., and assigned 
to the Bemis Industries Inc., of 
Boston. This invention relates to 
an improved method of building 
construction involving the use of 
parts that are manufactured in 
quantities and which do not re- 
quire cutting or fitting on the job. 


BANK, STORE AND OFFICE 
FIXTURES—CABINET WORK 


OF GUARANTEED QUALITY 
CHURCH SEATING 


Office and Factory: 
64 RAUSCH ST., Bet. 7th and 8th Sts. 
San Francisco 
Telephone HE mlock 2858 


G. P. W. Jensen & Son 
Building Construction 


320 Market Street, San Francisco 
Phone 2444 


MULLEN MFG. 
COMPANY 


GENERAL 
ROOFING CO. 


HARRY HENNINGS 


Office and Warehouse: 
BEACH AND HALLECK STS. 
OAKLAND, CALIF. 


Member Builders Exchange 
Telephone OLympic 5208 


WEDGE NOTCH COLUMN CLAMPS 


FOR 
Rapidity, Economy 
and Efficiency 
USE 


STEELFORMS 


FOR 
Concrete Construction 


STEELFORM 
CONTRACTING CO. 


SAN FRANCISCO 
PORTLAND 


DOVETAIL ANCHOR SLOT 


Los ANGELEa 
SEATTLE 


о 
а 
- 
о 
ш 
ч. 
ч 
o 
б 
с 
ш 
[e] 
2, 
о 
E 
ul 
4 
к 
Е 
E 


STEEL, CONSTRUCTION TOWERS 


The Architcct and Engineer, January, 1953 


Armstrong Flooring 


Specified and used on the 
following jobs designed by 
Kent 6 Hass, Architects 


House of Gro. C. Perry, Alameda 


House of В. H. Swayne, Alameda 
House of Ltoyp Swayne, Alameda 
Brokerage office of ANDERSON & 
Fox, Los Angeles 
Brokerage office of E. K. Pierce, 
Seattle 


VAN FLEET-FREEAR CO. 


557 Howard Street, San Francisco 


ОА ОХОО СУКСА 
Mi What architects and all who build have 
М learned to expect from Quandt craftsmen: 


"Co-operation for Quality” 

КЕ Materials applied efficiently and expeditiously 

MA by brush or spray application to achieve the 
| best result at the minimum cost to the owner. | 


f A. Quandt & Sons 


Painters and Decorators 
SiNcE 1885 
Md 374 GUERRERO STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 
( Telephone MArket 1711 
owe 
IM Quandt-quality is available for the small job 
be as well as the large. Pioneers and Special- 
mists in the application of Lacquer in the 
pA architectural field. Complete decorative 
М color schemes designed and furnished, 
М Advice for technical painting requirements 
furnished. Our operations are state-wide. 


BATES-CARPENTER 
COMPANY 


Distributors of 
Building Specialties 


Atsco Roller Screens 
Atsco Tubular Metal Screens 
Fereous and Non Fereous Metal 


Medicine Cases—Wood and Steel 
lroning Boards—Wood and Steel 


Shower Doors—Bronze and Alnminum 


Ariston Steel Windows 


Estimates Furnished without Obligation 
557 MARKET STREET 
San Francisco, Calif. SUtter 5328 


EFFICIENT 
HEATING 


For АП Types of Buildings 


Residence Work a Specialty 


ALADDIN 
Heating Corp. 


5107 Broadway, Oakland 
Phone OLympic 5424 


The Architect and Engineer, January. 1933 


The invention may be advan- 
tageously employed to provide 
any desired layout or arrangement 
of rooms, placing of windows and 
doors and permits of employment 
of any style of interior and exter- 
ior finish so that it may be im- 
possible without actual measure- 
ments to determine whether or not 
houses of widely varying types 
have been constructed under the 
old or the new method. 


* * ж 


APPARATUS FOR ROOF RAISING 

А patent was issued to Seth M. 
Gooder of Chicago, Ш., for meth- 
od and apparatus for raising roofs. 

It is sometimes necessary to 
raise the roof of a garage in order 
to permit another story to be 
added. 

'The apparatus makes it possible 
to raise a roof by simple means 
that will carry the roof trusses 
near the ends, thus permitting 
building on top of the old wall. 


* * ж 


MINIMUM DRESSING ROOM SPACE 

A patent for building was is- 
sued to Charles E. Gillespie of 
Semour, Ind. 


The invention relates to a 
building having sleeping and 
dressing compartments so con- 
structed and arranged as to take 
up minimum space. 

Each of a pair of dressing com- 
partments is connected with a 
sleeping compartment. One sleep- 
ing compartment is superposed 
upon the other, whereby a maxi- 
mum of usable space may be pro- 


Raphael Co. 


Painters and Decorators 
on the following: 
House of 
ALFRED J. Гамовевс : Oakland 
£ Brokerage Office of 
J. Вавтн © Co. : San Francisco 


CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH 
San Mateo 
Brokerage Office of 
E. F. HurroN 6 Co. : Oakland 
Brokerage Office of 
ANDERSON © Fox : Los Angeles 


270 Tehama Street San Francisco 


Zenestra 


STEEL 
WINDOWS 


For Every Type of Building 


DETROIT STEEL PRODUCTS 
COMPANY 
Pacific Coast Factory: Oakland 
Branches 
Los Angeles 


San Francisco Seattle 


Good Buildings Deserve 
Good Hardware 


581 Market Street 
SUtter 6063 


Office 


Partitions 


Reinhold sectional wood and 
glass partitions (interchange- 
able) may be adapted to any 
modern office requirement in a 


new or old building. 


Complete Information File 
sent on request 


Pacific Manufacturing 
Company 


High Class Interior Finish 
Quality Millwork 
Monadnock Bidg., 


Ssn Franeisco Los Angelea 
GA rfield 7755 AX ridge 9011 


1315 Seventh Street, Onkland 
GL encourt 7859 


641 Merrill Ave., 


9] 


Structural 


Steel 


Fabrication and Erection 


о 5 5 
Pacific Coast 
Engineering Co. 
Foot of 14th St., Oakland 
НІ gate 1322 


Anderson & Ringrose 


General Contractors 


320 Market Street, San Francisco 
Phone DO uglas 1373 


LEATHER-STEEL 
RUBBER-COCOA 
WOOD 


Mats and Mattings 
Ezy-Rug Carpet-Tex 


Manufactured and Installed by 


LEATHER 
MAT MFG. CO.. Inc. 


340 Sansome St. San Francisco 


DINWIDDIE 
CONSTRUCTION 
COMPANY 


Builders of the new дутпа- 


sium, University of Cali- 
fornia; Grace Cathedral, 
Russ Building and Hartford 
Insurance Building, San. 
Francisco; Life Science 
Building, University of Cali- 
fornia, Berkeley. 


CROCKER BUILDING 
SAN FRANCISCO 


vided to a minimum of ground 
space. А store room or the like 
may be converted into individual 
sleeping compartments for a great 
number of persons. 

* * * 
REVOLVING SCENERY FOR THEATER 

A patent was issued to Arthur 
J. Moulton of Islip, М. Y., for 
theater. 

This invention relates to theat- 
rical appliances having a circular 
revoluble auditorium surrounded 
by a stationary annular stage. 

The conventional theater, where- 
in changes of scenery and setting 
on the stage are accomplished by 
the eschelonment in depth of a 
series of side sliding panels dis- 
posed behind a main drop curtain 
is objectionable, for the reason 
that the same stage area is used 
for all scenes and settings. A 
change of scene can only be ac- 
complished by dropping the cur- 
tain, thus cutting off the view of 
the audience from the stage, then 
shifting the scenery by side slid- 
ing panels and physically moving 
the various articles. This is not 
only laborious but it is time соп- 
suming and necessitates intermis- 
sions. 

An object of the invention is to 
construct a theater wherein a ser- 
ies of scenes and settings may be 
presented to the audience without 
the necessity of changing scenery 
and settings during the perform- 
ance. Hae. 

BANK PROTECTIVE 
SYSTEM 

А patent for bank protective 
system was issued to Percy R. 
Drury of Boyce, Va. The inven- 
tion is designed to provide means 
for safeguarding banks, stores and 
other places of business against 
hold-ups. An object of the inven- 
tion is the provision of means 
whereby the interior of a room in 
which a hold-up is staged may be 
plunged in darkness except the 
area occupied by the perpetrators 
of the hold-up, thus rendering the 
bank personnel invisible. Means 
are provided for trapping the per- 
petrators and for giving an alarm 
to the police. 


A WESTERN 
бу IRON 


STRUCTURAL STEEL 


WESTERN IRON WORKS 
141-147 BEALE STREET 
132-148 MAIN STREET 


San Francisco Phone DA venport 2575 


REPUBLIC STEEL 


CORPORATION 


Re 


Manufacturers of 
ENDURO Stainless Steel; TON- 
CAN Copper Molybdenum Iron 
Sheets and Pipe; and Steel Pipe, 
Sheets and Reinforcing Bar for 

every building purpose. 
Write for information 
Rialto Building. San Franciaco, Calif. 


Firat Natl. Bank Bldg., Los Angelea 
Smith Tower Building, Seattle, Wash. 


JOHNSON 
OILBURNER Sc 


ill Y | 
N 


For use in Commercial and 
Industrial Buildings, Apart- 


ment Houses and Homes. 


e 
S. T. Johnson €o. 


Main Office and Factory 
940-950 Arlington St., Oakland 


MacDonald & Kahn 


General 


Contractors 


OND 


Financial Center Bldg. 
405 Montgomery St. 


San Francisco 


The Architect and Engineer, January, 1933 


ТНЕ 
ARCHITECT 


AND 
ENGINEER 


FEBRUARY 1933 


| 
| 


Ba 


к 
2 


қ 


Ш 


ff 


A. and character. . . . Every person has 


two aspects : . . the one we see and the one we know. The 


first ts apparent immediately. The second appears only 


with acquaintance. г. . In this respect, machines аге 


like men. In appearance they may conform to written 
specifications. Upon the unwritten depend their behavior. 


Their quality and stamina and worth can be established 


only after long acquaintance. Upon these unwritten 


specifications Otis Elevator Company has established a 


tradition for the finest in elevator construction ‚а 


tradition constantly enhanced by pioneering work in the 
fields of invention, research and testing. True progress 


comes by never standing still... . Otis Elevator Company. 


Hand’. 
JOHNSON? Ж 


2% 

С шм 
AUTOMATIC CONTROL | КИ т 
s particularly desirable for such ә RE 


nstallations . . . Comfort, Economy, 


Atleft: А cabinet 
hides the “’stand- 
ing radiator” with 
Johnson valve on 
steam supply. 


convenience are the dividends paid 


yy the JOHNSON SYSTEM 


Radiators are being installed in less accessible locations than ever before. In schools, clubs, 
hospitals, homes, offices, and theaters, non-ferrous heating units are concealed within the walls. 
Cast-iron radiators are recessed behind grilles or hidden by cabinets. То operate the radiator 
valves manually, an unhandy access panel or valve with extended stem and unsightly handle 
must be provided. Where the Johnson System of Heat Control is installed to control 
radiators automatically, no such provisions are necessary. 

The Johnson control valves, out of sight behind the grilles 

or panels, are commanded by a Johnson thermostat in the 

room. The relationship between thermostat and valve is 

such that the excessive temperature within the enclosure 

does not affect in any way the temperature at which the 

valve operates. The determining factor is the actual room 

temperature sensed by the thermostat. The valves are 

metal throughout and do not deteriorate. 


bone JoH NSON SERVICE | Branch use 


Milwaukee, Wis. COM РА М Y Principal Cities 
est n 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 3 


| Thumb Tacks. and т. За 


MANY architects have expressed 
to us their interest and appreciation in 
the publication of the late John Galen 
Howard's work, the first instalment of 
which is presented in this issue of THE 
Arcuitect AND ENGINEER. The series 
will probably be extended over a period 
of several months, starting with Mr. 
Howard's earliest sketches in 1883 when 
he was 19 years old, and continuing 
with outstanding examples of his work 
up to within a short time before his 
death. 


Mr. Howard had a systematic way of 
signing his drawings, even in his school 
days, so that the works of his own hand 
are easily identificd. The percentage of 
these autographed drawings is high, espc- 
cially iu view of the many calls on his 
personal time. His every natural inclin- 
ation, quite as much as his conviction of 
an architect's functions, inevitably kept 
his facile hand busy. Some of Mr. How- 
ard's earliest "school" drawings are pre- 
served. They were made at the Massa- 
chusetts Institute of Technology when 
he was twenty or twenty-onc. 


Mr. Howard's drawings while attend- 
ing the Ecole des Beaux Arts School are 
of particular interest. Unfortunatcly some 
of his best delineations in Paris are not 
available for the reason that they werc 
retained by the government of this school 
because of their excellence. However, 
some of the final studies for the Medailles 
have been preserved. They are execut- 
ed in florid detail then current, but of 
their type, they are of exceptional mcrit. 
Some of these drawings are reproduced 
in this month's portfolio. 


In subsequent issucs, we shall present 
material, as far as possible, from the 
original drawings of Mr. Howard and of 
his works ш New York and on the 
Pacific Coast. 


BEGINNING with the March is- 
sue, aud continuing alternate months, a 
series of four articles on City Planning 
and Landscape Architecture, by Ralph D. 
Cornell aud Geo. D. Hall of the firm of 
Cook, Hall and Cornell, Landscape Arch- 
itects and City Planners of Los Augeles, 
will he published. The articles will appeal 
to the layman as well as to the minds 
of the contemporary professions, the 
purpose being to instill a cooperative 
spirit. The first two articles by Mr. Cor- 
nell will deal with the landscape profes- 
sion from the broader aspect of its origin 
and ramified developments, with particu- 


lar attention given to the phases of City 
Planning in its many manifestations. Suit- 
able illustrations will be pesented, includ- 
ing sketches and photographs of perspec- 
tive and completed work throughout the 
state. 

A third article by Geo. D. Hall will 
deal with the subject of Park and Recrea- 
tion Areas. Mr. Hall will stress the spirit 
of park design more than the technical 
phases of the building of park plans and 
will describe somewhat graphically the 
way the wheels turn in the evolution of 
park projects. The fourth and final art- 
icle will deal with the Planning of 
Grounds for Institutions, with illustra- 
tions of school grounds and campus 
plans from California and the Hawaiian 
Islands. 

Mr. Cornell is a Fellow of the Ameri- 
can Society of Landscape Architects and 
member of the Honorary Fraternity Phi 
Beta Kappa. Upon receiving his Bachel- 
or's Degree at Pomona College, he took a 
three-year graduate course at the Har- 
vard School of Landscape Architecture, 
where he received a degree of Master 
in Landscape Architecture. 

Мг. Hall is also a Fellow of the Amer- 
icn Society of Landscape Architects aud 
has served on the Executive Committee 
of the Boston Society of Landscape Ar- 
chitects and the same organization on the 
Pacific Coast. He studied his profession 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Tech- 
nology and Harvard University. 


203: в 


STRONG acid solutions used іп 
cleaning the exteriors of buildings are said 
to have caused such extensive damage 
to facing materials, joints, window trim 
and glass on a number of Pacific Coast 
buildings, that the clay products industry 
has deemed it necessary to bring the 
matter to the attention of contractors who 
specialize in this class of work. The 
Clay Products Institute of California rec- 
ommends the following receipt for clean- 
ing terra cotta facing or trim: 


“With steam and hot water remove 
as much dirt and grease as possible from 
the face of the masonry. The steam and 
hot water should be delivered at not less 
than 150 pounds pressure per square inch 
and at a temperature of not less than 180 
degrees Fahrenheit. The steam should 
carry about six gallons of hot water per 
minute. 

“Where all of the dirt cannot be re- 
moved economically by stcam and hot 
water, then use fiber scrubbing brushes 


and a solution of oxalic crystals, com- 
posed of 1 volume of oxalic crystals and 
8 volumes of water. 

“In cases where this solution is used, 
all masonry and windows should be 
washed off immediately with steam and 
hot water to remove traces of the clean- 
ing solution.” 


34 ee 2% 
4 4 oe 


THE California State Board of 
Architectural Examiners have made pub- 
lic the following letter by Governor 
James Rolph, Jr., which states that he 
will do everything within his power to 
see that architects are given an oppor- 
tunity to "bid" on state architectural 
work. It is understood there will be sev- 
eral commissions handed out shortly to 
those who are “in” with the administra- 
tion, including State College work and a 
$260,000 building at Agnew State Hos- 
pital. The Governor's letter follows: 


December 9, 1932 
Mr. C. J. Ryland, 
California State Board of Architectural 
Examiners 
450 McAllister Street 
San Francisco. 
Dear Mr. Ryland: 

Mr. Glen V. Slater, Assistant Director 
of the Department of Professional and 
Vocational Standards, has forwarded 
your letter of the 6th instant to me con- 
cerning architectural work among state 
colleges, etc. 

I appreciate the existing situation and 
will do everything within my power to 
see that the architects of the state are 
afforded an opportunity of bidding upon 
architectural work. 

With best wishes, 

Very sincerely yours, 
(Signed) James Rolph, Jr. 
Governor of California. 


и и 3 


FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT, cred- 
ited with being the originator of the 
modernistic' style of architecture in this 
country, recently paid San Francisco and 
Berkeley a visit, lecturing in the College 
city and speaking in San Francisco un- 
der the auspices of the Forum. 

Wright's theory of architecture is that 
of externalized philosophy. And in view 
of that, he sees no future for American 
architecture until the architecture of so- 
ciety, state and economics walk hand in 
hand with the architecture of building. 

“There can be no great art save for a 
great life," he said. "And there can be 
no great life save for a great people. 

"Г believe in organic architecture. I 
believe that buildings must rise out of 
the ground into the light, as people rise 
out of the ground into light." 


The Architect and Engincer. February, 1933 


ТНЕ 


VOLUME 112 
NUMBER 9 


ARCHITECT 


FEBRUARY 


AND ENGINEER 


NN 


S 


AR, 


FREDERICK W. JONES, Editor 


EDGAR М. KIERULFF, Ass’t. Editor 


Contributing Editors 


CLARENCE R. WARD, San Francisca 
CARLETON MONROE WINSLOW, 


Los Angeles 


HAROLD W. DOTY, Portland, Orc. 


CHAS. H. ALDEN, Seattle, Wash. 


Consulting and Advisory Editors 


J. HARRY BLOHME 
LEWIS P. HOBART 
TIMOTHY L. PFLUEGER 
ELMER GREY 
CLARENCE A. TANTAU 
WM. Г. WOOLLETT 
JOHN J. DONOVAN 
JOHN BAKEWELL, JR. 
EDWIN L. SNYDER 
THOMAS J. KENT 
ALBERT F. ROLLER 

J. STEWART FAIRWEATHER 
JOHN W. GREGG 
RALPH D. CORNELL 
CHAS. H. CHENEY 

W. ADRIAN 

JULIAN С. MESIC 

Н. J. BRUNNIER 

L. H. NISHEJAN 


Cover Picture 


Frontispiece 


44 
44 
48 


Ghis ©0755 це 


MODEL RELIEF—-ELECTRICAL POWER” 

Warren Cheney, Sculptor 

LOWER GARDEN OF DODD HOUSE, HOLLYWOOD 

Wiliam J. Dodd, Architect; Charles Gibbs Adams, Landscape Architect 


TENT 
А TUSCAN HILL VILLAGE AND HOW IT GREW 
Charles Gibbs Adams, Landscape Architert 
BETTER HOUSING 
V. Gilmore Iden 
WHAT IS THE MODERN SCULPTOR TRYING TO DO? 
Warren Cheney, Sculptor 
EFFECT OF RETRENCHMENT ON HOUSING AND OFFICE SPACE 
Philip К. Brown 
THE GRAPHIC SIDE OF A GREAT ARCHITECT’S 
ACCOMPLISHMENTS 
VICISSITUDES OF A YOUNG ARCHITECT 
Elmer Grey, Е.А.Г.А. 
ие CHANGED TO NEW ONE ВУ REVERSING STEEL 
ARTIFICIAL EARTHQUAKES AID ENGINEERS IN SHOCK TESTS 
CHAPTER AND CLUB MEETINGS 


WITH THE ARCHITECTS 
PLATES AND ILLUSTRATIONS 


LAMB HOUSE, HOLLYWOOD 
William 7. Рода, Architect 
DURKIN HOUSE, HOLLYWOOD 
Wesley Eager, Architect 
BRONZE PORTRAIT OF GUNNAR JOHANSEN 
Warren Cheney, Sculptor 
чери 5” 
Warren Cheney, Sculptor 
“MOTHER AND CHILD" 
Warren Cheney, Sculptor 
OPUS 67 
Warren Cheney, Sculptor 
“PAN” 
Warren Cheney, Sculptor 
MEDAL PRINT,—"LIVING BRONZE" 
Alex Leventon 
WORK OF JOHN GALEN HOWARD. FALA. 
Howard's Birthplace—36 
Mr. Howard's First Constructed Building— 36 
Hunting Lodge—37 
Problem in Design—38 
Problem in Design—39 
Sketches in Southern California—340 
HUNTINGTON ART GALLERY. SAN MARINO, CALIFORNIA 
Myron Hunt and Elmer Grey, Architects 
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE CHURCH, MILWAUKEE 
Elmer Grey, Architect 
STEEL BRIDGE OVER LOS ALAMOS CREEK, CALIFORNIA 


Next © отїһ 


Elmer Grey, Е.А.].А., will continue his interesting series of articles on 
“The Vicissitudes of a Young Architect. 

Ralph D. Cornell, Landscape Architect, presents the first of a series of 
four articles prepared especially for this magazine on City Planning, Park 
Development and Landscape Architecture. 

The second Portfolio of Sketches and Delineations hy the late John Galen 
Howard, F.A.1.A., will include some of his Boise Arts work in Paris. 


Published monthly by THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER, INC. 


W.J.L. KIERULFE, President and Manager 
New York Represcntative—The Spencer Young Company, 299 Madison Ave., New York City 


1662 Russ Building, San Francisco, California 
FRED'K. W. JONES, Vice-President 


L. B. PENHORWOOD, Secretary 


Subseriptions—United States and Pan-American, $4.00 a year; single copy, $ .60. Canada and foreign countries, 56.00 a year. 


LOWER GARDEN OF DODD HOUSE, HOLLYWOOD 
WILLIAM J. DODD, ARCHITECT: 
CHARLES GIBBS ADAMS, LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT 


It is now the guest house of Cecil B. De Mille. 
This villa was formerly the home of Charley Chaplin. 


ТНЕ 
ARCHITECT 
AND ENGINEER 


FEBRUARY 1933 
VOLUME 119 
NUMBER TWO 


А TUSCAN HILL VILLAGE AND HOW IT GREW 


by 
CHARLES GIBBS ADAMS 
Landscape Architect 


| HIS is a story of. frescoes and many perfumed flowers. 


hanging gardens, and of an architect who Then Charley Chaplin came along. at 
could not keep for a home any house he the height of his glory. The distinguished 
built therein, with that dream in his heart. comedian fell in love with the house, and 


The public would 
not let him have it. 
Laughlin Park 
Hill, steep and high, 
towers over Holly- 
wood. Once, in more 
Arcadian days, its 
crown was orchard- 
ed with old silvered 
Mission olive trees, 
many of which still 
linger to shelter the 
gardens that have 
grown up there 
since. The summit 
overlooks the cinema 
capital, and Los An- 
geles beyond, as 
Fiesole looks down 
on Florence. 
William J. Dodd, 
A. I. А., designed 
and built a Tuscan 
villa on this pictur- 
esque hilltop for his 
home, and made it 
gay with outdoor 


THE LAMB HOUSE, HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA 
William J. Dodd, Architect 
Chas. G. Adams, Landscape Architect 


4» 


coaxed a lease from 
its builder. Next, 
Cecil B. De Mille, 
whose embowered 
estate adjoined it, 
set his heart upon 
the place, demanded 
it for his own at any 
price, and won. It is 
now his guest house. 
* * * 


The architect 
walked a few paces 
down the ridge to 
the next building 
site, and built an- 
other villa around 
old gates and bal- 
conies and marbles 
he had brought from 
Florence. He em- 
bowered it with Ital- 
ian cypresses, Greek 
myrtles, gaudy Bou- 
gainvilleas and 
tropic trumpet vines, 
and cooled its 


garden with a Villa D'Este cascade т 
a viale of dark cypresses. 

But Mr. Dodd could not hold that house 
either. It was coaxed away from him and 
is now the home of Frank H. Lamb. 

The architect, still embued with enthus- 


scape architect completed the picture with 
a hillside garden of many levels, held up 
with walls of rough brown rock from the 
Hollywood mountains, and planted in mag- 
nolias and camellias, scarlet aloes and ivory 
yuccas, night-scented jassmine and poet's 


THE LAMB HOUSE, HOLLY WOOD, CALIFORNIA 


William J. Dodd, Architect; Charles G. Adams, Landscape Architect 
Italian Cypresses against house . . 


iasm and courage, walked around the curve 
of the road to the next building site and 
built one more Italian house to match the 
others in architectural sentiment. Perhaps 
he could turn a deaf ear to pleas and hold 
onto this less pretentious home. This time 
he had the young architect, Wesley Eager, 
plan the house. But no sooner had his land- 


. Violet Bougainvillea, from South America, over gate 


jassmine, guavas, oranges and avocadoes, 
than it went the way of those other houses. 
Mr. and Mrs. Joseph L. Durkin craved it 
for their home—and won it away from the 
builder. 

There was one site left along the curved 
hilltop road for the final home of the arch- 
itect in what had thus step by step become 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ај 12 » FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


a Tuscan hill village,—a lot so steep that 
a structure of two floors at the entrance 
must be four stories high at the rear. The 
viletta Mr. Dodd and Mr. Eager built by 
the roadside looks across the way to an 
uprising precipice beautified bv a wall laced 


apricot-colored oleanders, oranges. pome- 
granates and figs. At its base is a tea per- 
gola of eucalyptus logs, roofed with that 
queen of climbing roses, the semi-tropic 
Belle of Portugal. 

The last house and garden finished, the 


THE DURKIN HOUSE, HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA 
Wesley Еадег, Architect; Charles С. Adams. Landscape Architect 


Pepper tree on left ... Acacia Latifolia on right ... Mahogany trumpet vine on house 


with flowering vines and inset with a foun- 
tain of many-colored tiles from Spain; at 
the rear it looks down over its steep little 
garden and out upon Cahuenga Valley. 
holding Hollywood in its lap. The garden. 
under a group of towering old Eucalypti 
that happened there long ago. is fragrant 
with Mexican tuberoses, Spanish brooms, 


architect sailed away to Florence to pick 
up marble for his terraces. Antonio Mor- 
eno leased the home; but only for the brief 
period that Mr. Dodd was abroad. Later 
Moreno decided that he, too, must spend 
more of his years in the Tuscan village, so 
he built himself a villa there on the rim of 
the world. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER A 13 > FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


THE DURKIN HOUSE, HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA 
WESLEY EAGER, ARCHITECT; 
CHARLES GIBBS ADAMS, LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER dii 15 > FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


GARDEN, THE DURKIN HOUSE, HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA 
CHARLES GIBBS ADAMS, LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT 


Old pepper trees overhanging ... Yucca Pendula along stairway . . . 
Southern Jassmine on upper wall 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ^ 17 b FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


THE DURKIN HOUSE, HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA 
WESLEY EAGER, ARCHITECT; CHAS. GIBBS ADAMS, LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 19 » FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


ы 


— w 
Е А, P 


ANOTHER VIEW ОЕ THE ORIGINAL DODD HOUSE, 
HOLLYWOOD 


WILLIAM J. DODD, ARCHITECT; 
CHARLES GIBBS ADAMS, LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 21 y FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


т 3 
a 


namo rcp 


TEA PERGOLA AT FOOT OF DODD HOUSE, HOLLY WOOD 


Charles Gibbs Adams, Landscape Architect 
Clothed with Belle of Portugal rose vines . . . flanked with Guatemelan avocado trees 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ^ 22 » FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


BETTER HOUSING 


CD. years of de- 


pression have lett most business men with 
minds devoid of imagination and easy prey 
to all sorts of hallucinations. This is a per- 
iod when "technocracy" and other “isms” 
flourish best. 


The fairy tale that the steel industry is 
planning to go into the business of house 
building is but typical of the day. Let me 
hasten to reassure you that, so far as my 
knowledge goes, and I believe I am in a 
position to know a little about the subject. 
the steel industry is not prepared and is 
not contemplating anything of the kind. 


The steel mills roll various structural 
shapes, many light shapes, which are ad- 
mirably adapted to the use of the house 
builder. But the mills have been rolling 
these for years, they intend to continue 
roling them and selling them to anyone 
who has the desire to build anything. 


The steel industry saw the automobile 
develop, but it did not elect to invest any 
of its capital or its resources in the auto- 
mobile industry. The steel industry saw 
the railroads develop, but it did not elect 
to invest any of its capital or its resources 
in railroading. 

In the field of construction the picture is 
somewhat different. Some of the larger 
steel mills do own and operate fabricating 
plants and do engage in fabricating and 
erecting structural steel in buildings and 
bridges. But those mill-owned units are 


“Ап addres: delivered before the New Jersey Mason Material Dealers As- 
sociation January 12, 1933. 


by 
V. GILMORE IDEN 


operated in competition with some six 
hundred independent fabricating plants 
throughout the country. 


These fabricating plants have been 
equipped to handle heavy work chiefly. The 
big punches, shearing machines, and simi- 
lar equipment could not profitably be put 
to work on the light structural material 
that would go into house building. Small 
independent fabricating shops, however, 
are interested and for many years they or 
some inventive mind connected with them 
have experimented with building residences 
of steel. 


House building is quite different from 
the building of a bridge or a tier building, 
however. Їп the first place, house building 
is so closely allied with real estate that we 
doubt if it could be successfully separated 
from it. The realtor, the speculative builder, 
the supply dealer, and that vast organiza- 
tion which has grown up to supply new 
houses in the United States, represents an 
evolution that not even the steel industry 
could disrupt, even should it want to. We 
who wish to see steel introduced into 
houses, therefore, recognize the necessity 
of developing something that will easily fit 
into the existing order of things. 


In the last decade, however, the country 
has been overridden by the “jerry” builder. 
They have covered their poor construction 
with a veneer of good looks, which may 
have deceived the housewife but it repre- 
sents a very poor risk to the financer. 


Most American homes are fire traps. It 
is claimed that only three percent of the 
habitations in New York City are fireproof. 
Strange. indeed it is, that man will go to his 
work in a fireproof train, conduct his busi- 
ness in a fireproof office, dine in a fireproof 
hotel, but leave his family in an inflammable 
home. 


Realtors well know that in a new house 
deterioration starts during the first year. 
For that reason a purchaser is usually re- 
quired to pay off the second mortgage by 
the end of the first three years, and the 
first mortgage after the first ten years. They 
know that the repair bills after that will 
be so large that the owner will hardly have 
enough left for taxes, not to say anything 
of the principal. 


The “jerry” builder is to a large extent 
to blame for the viewpoint now common on 
the quality of construction and the amount 
of maintenance required. He has shopped 
the dealers out of any possible profit for 
them as well as himself. He has no inter- 
est whatever in the future of the home he 
has built; he has no permanent investment 
and is, therefore, footloose. 


Quality of materials selected, care with 
which the materials are arranged, and qual- 
ity of workmanship, are the factors that 
make for quality in the structure. The ten- 
dency toward poor quality is further in- 
creased by the fact that when loans can be 
obtained there is quite commonly offered 
three times as many dollars as are required 
and from sources that have no great inter- 
est in the future value. Until the building 
of houses is returned to individuals or com- 
panies that have local responsibility as well 
as investment, future value of them will 
be low. 


А fireproof, shrinkproof and vermin 
proof house can be built of steel. It has 
been proved that such a house will cost but 
little more than a house of wood-frame con- 
struction. In the most expensive of de- 
signs the steel framing has increased the 
cost of the house but ten per cent, and in 
one instance [ know the increase in cost 
was but twenty-five dollars in a house that 
sold for twenty thousand dollars. 


For about ten years the American Insti- 
tute of Steel Construction has been collect- 
ing data on the best method of building 
houses with steel. We have had our atten- 
tion called to some sixty different methods, 
many of them very irrational, some very 
good. indeed, and others promising great 
improvements in the art of house building. 
Our Institute has not attempted to promote 
the building of houses with steel, but we 
have endeavored to act as a sort of clearing 
house of information on the subject. 


Last May we held a forum on house con- 
struction at which the doors were thrown 
open to all designers in any of the different 
building materials. We were merely desir- 
ous of finding out what has actually been 
accomplished in the improvement of mate- 
rials or methods in house construction. 


Although not entirely discarded, the idea 
of building homes entirely of steel played 
a rather inconspicuous part in the discus- 
sions. Few of the speakers appearing on 
the program thought sufficiently well of the 
proposal to mention it, although the data 
sent in by one company—De Cel Corpora- 
tion of Chicago—indicated that an effort 
is being made to build cheap houses with 
steel sheets welded to a steel frame. On 
the other hand it was pretty generally rec- 
ognized that many, if not all construction 
materials, are utilized in the building of 
modern houses and that it is essential to 
find new methods of utilizing these if it is 
hoped to reduce the cost of housing and 
provide a better home for persons in the 
lower income brackets. 


The greatest expense is in labor at the 
site. Reduce the amount of labor and the 
time of erection, and the cost of housing 
can be greatly reduced. Efforts have been 
made to accomplish this result by resorting 
to one of three methods. First, change the 
design and incorporate improved engineer- 
ing principles in the construction. Second, 
manufacture standard units which can be 
incorporated in walls, ceilings and floors. 
Third, manufacture the complete rooms or 
even the complete house and ship to the 
site. 


Very little evidence has been developed 
to support the idea that the factoried house 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER - 24 №» FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


is commercially practical. Many proposals 
have been drawn up and discussed specu- 
latively. Only the Steel Frame House 
Company of Pittsburgh actually attempted 
to manufacture a complete cottage (the 
Brisbane cottage). No evidence has been 
offered to show that such an experiment 
was financially or engineeringly successful. 
Other companies are reputed to be experi- 
menting with the idea but none of them 
have yet developed it to the point where 
factoried cottages or houses are actually 
offered on the market. 


Mass production has been stressed and 
it is insisted that houses could be produced 
in the way we now manufacture automo- 
biles. No evidence has been offered, how- 
ever, to show, even though houses were 
factoried on the mass production principle, 
that it would be practical to market the 
output. There has been no evidence that 
a distribution system similar to that used 
for automobiles, could be adopted to fac- 
toried houses. It would require a denser 
sale than is yet available for small houses 
to warrant the creation of local sales agen- 
cies. Not only is the commercial considera- 
tion problematical but the engineering is 
not entirely satisfactory. What may be 
saved in labor on the house in the factory 
may be spent in the cost of hauling and 
lifting the completed structure to its foun- 
dations. These are some of the obstacles 
that must first be overcome. 


According to the evidence offered, great 
savings might be made, however, by the 
factory manufacture of standard units for 
walls and floors. The Japanese idea of 
using screens for walls and partitions 
might well be adapted to modern material 
and modern American factory methods. 
Large floor units, stair units and wall slabs 
have been utilized and demonstrated as en- 
tirely feasible. These have been made of 
various kinds of materials, such as cement, 
gypsum, steel, wood, patented wall boards. 
They have been utilized in buildings in- 
tended for various purposes. from the tem- 
porary shed to the expensive house. 


Efforts have been made and are still 
being made to produce a house with steel 
framing, somewhat after the accepted fash- 


ion of wood framing, which will vie in cost 
with houses of like class. The first efforts 
were to substitute light rolled beams for 
floors and roof, with light channels or 
angles for uprights. Detailing and fabrica- 
tion resulted in excessive costs. Some of 
these houses resulted in cost as much as 
five cents a pound for the erected steel. 
The Steel Frame House Company and 
others attempted to fabricate standard light 
sections with holes punched at standard 
distances so that they could be connected 
anywhere. This method greatly reduced 
the cost of the framing but did not bring 
it down to a really commercial basis. 


With the introduction of welding, build- 
ers have been attempting to eliminate de- 
tailing and fabrication in the shop as much 
as possible. But welding at the site is still 
expensive. When mill lengths are used and 
the joints welded in the field it has been 
possible to bring the cost down to approx- 
imately the cost of a wood frame. This was 
accomplished by Steelbilt Homes, Inc., of 
Cleveland, Ohio. Other companies, such 
as the Housing Corporation of Waverly, 
Massachusetts, have utilized steel studs at 
major points to protect the house against 
shrinkage but spaced these out with wood 
studs, these intermediate studs being used 
as stiffeners for the curtain wall and not as 
a construction support. 


More recently an effort has been made to 
utilize framed units for wall construction. 
It would seem that these have been inspired 
by the success of steel casements. These 
unit frames are sometimes made of stand- 
ard rolled sections and sometimes of formed 
sheets, or a combination of the two. 


One of the most noteworthy of the all- 
steel houses is the one that was sponsored 
by the American Rolling Mill Company 
and that was completed last summer at 
Solon, ten miles from Cleveland, Ohio. 
This was designed by the Insulated Steel 
Company, Inc., which now plans to build 
an improved model at the Chicago World's 
Fair. This house was designed for con- 
struction by mass production methods with 
factory-assembled units of pressed sheet 
steel for walls and floors, all- welded, 
“frameless.” The Solon house contained 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 25 > FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


eight rooms, having an exterior finish of 
porcelain enamel shingles. [$ cost might 
be greatly reduced by eliminating the 
enameled exterior. 

This house was built to demonstrate the 
adaptability of sheet metal to low cost home 
construction, and was not intended to pro- 
duce a standardized type of dwelling. 
Rather, the demonstration aimed to perfect 
a method of construction which could be 
used to reproduce any type of architecture 
for the individual home, thus overcoming 
one of the strongest objections to the fac- 
tory-produced house. 

Need for a structural frame was elimin- 
ated by constructing the walls of pressed 
steel sheets having box-like corrugations, 
or channels, which stiffen the sheets suffi- 
ciently to carry floor and roof loads. Floors 
were made self-supporting by a cellular 
box-like construction employing Z sheets. 
'The house required 17 tons of steel, which 
was distributed about 6 pounds per square 
foot in the floors, and 2.9 pounds per 
square foot in the walls. Both floor and 
wall units were sheared to length at the 
mill and assembled and welded in sections 
at the shop prior to delivery to the job. 


This experiment very naturally raises 
the question of whether it is possible to 
introduce factory methods into house con- 
struction. According to popular report 
several important companies have been 
considering the problem in that light. 


In Chicago a company has been formed 
under the name of General Houses, Inc., 
led by the architect, Howard T. Fischer. 
Its purpose is to sell complete houses and 
it is said to be contracting with dealers for 
territory at this time. The construction, 
according to report, will combine various 
materials in its make-up and the companies 
selected to make these materials are leaders 
in their field. The floors are made of steel 
plate supported on I-beams. The walls in 
one model consist of steel plates combined 
with angle steel frames into sections which 
may contain doors or windows as required. 
The wall steel acts as the support for the 
floors and roof. The inside of the wall 
section will contain insulation and an in- 
terior finish. A bill of material for this 
building should consist of the number of 


wall, floor and roof sections. This can be 
assembled by bolting in the field so that 
complete enclosure of the structure will be 
accomplished in a very few days. Floor 
finishes, refrigeration, heating and venti- 
lating are considered part of the problem. 
'The complete houses can be sold from a 
catalogue. 

These programs are all doubtless very 
interesting but as practical builders you 
probably wish evidence that is more real. 
Some of these plans for "factorying the 
house, or parts of the house, may yet be 
developed. The ingenuity of man is some- 
thing no one can deny and I would not 
desire to prophesy that the task is impos- 
sible. 

On the other hand a sufficient number 
of steel-framed houses have been erected 
during the past ten years to afford some 
definite idea of what we can accomplish. 
While steel is the most perfect building 
material ever provided man, it does cost 
more than much of the cheap stuff hereto- 
fore put into houses. Its extra cost is offset 
by the fact that it is shrinkproof, that it will 
not harbor vermin or termites. The house 
is fireproof. 

We must be economical in its use, how- 
ever, and not waste the material. The pub- 
lic should, consequently, be interested in 
the fact that the United States Steel Cor- 
poration is planning to issue shortly a hand- 
book for house builders. It will be the first 
compendium ever offered by the steel in- 
dustry to the field. And some interesting 
innovations, based upon experience already 
observed in houses built of steel. will be 
proposed. What these may be, [ am not at 
liberty now to say, but I can quote you from 
Fred T. Llewellyn, Consulting Engineer of 
the United States Steel Corporation. 


Discussing the problem recently, Mr. 
Llewellyn said: 

“Іп tier building construction your steel 
frame is self sufficient, and should Бе so, 
both during construction and after comple- 
tion. If you follow the same rule in resi- 
dence construction and make your steel 
frame self sufficient during erection and 
after completion, it will weigh several times 
as much as it need. 


“All of the structural handbooks give а 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 26 » FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


limit for the ratio of slenderness of com- 
pression members, commonly expressed as 
L, R—Length over Radius. The handbooks 
limit that ratio to 120 for important mem- 
bers and from 160 to 200, at the outside, 
for minor members. Even in light struc- 
tures such as transmission towers they do 
not go beyond 250. In residence construc- 
tion frames are being put up successfully 
with a ratio of slenderness during construc- 
tion that extends to nearly 300. I have 
knowledge of a very good construction 
with a ratio of 293. By no means at the 
same loads as for lower ratios, but the 
handbooks give no value whatever to such 
members. 


"Pretty nearly all the steel frames that 
we have examined have studs that are from 
three to four inches in depth and from one 
and a quarter to two inches in width. 
Their clear height is in the neighborhood 
of nine to ten feet. Such a member, whether 
it be a rolled section, or made of sheet 
metal, or any other construction, will have 
considerable stiffness transversely of the 
wall, namely about its major axis in the 
direction of its depth. It will stiffen the 
wall, and it also has considerable strength 
to carry the superimposed load that comes 
from the first floor and any other super- 
imposed material or loads. In the other 
direction, however, in the plane of the wall, 
it has very little strength alone. that is, dur- 
ing construction. But fortunately it does 
not have to carry very much during con- 
struction. It has got to carry the weight 
of the steel above, it has got to carry a little 
staging, and it should allow for a chance 
load of probably between one-half and one 
ton. 


“After completion it has to carry much 
more than that at which it was figured as 
an independent member, but it will not fig- 
ure to carry a higher load as structural 
engineers are accustomed to figure. For in- 
stance, the architect specifies that the mas- 
onry shall be anchored to the steel studs 
every so often. What he means is that the 
studs shall be anchored to the masonry 
every so often. and this makes the anchor- 
age question a much more important one 
to the structural engineer than it might 
otherwise appear to be. With an anchorage 


every 18, 24, 48 inches, according to your 
design, you have a combined strength in 
your wall, whether it be masonry, brick, 
concrete, or one of the composition materi- 
als that are becoming so popular. All such 
materials stiffen the stud sidewise. In re- 
inforced concrete, it is true the concrete 
and the steel act together, but in reinforced 
concrete the steel reinforces the concrete 
against tension. In the construction I am 
referring to, the steel must be reinforced 
by the enveloping material against buckling 
under compression. 

"I conclude that the proper design of 
steel work in residences depends largely 
on materials other than steel. It depends 
upon the assistance of the enveloping mate- 
rials.” 

In practically all modern houses some 
steel is introduced. It may be no more than 
a beam to support the floor over the base- 
ment. It may be a column or two to sup- 
port the bathroom and the vital weights in 
the house. Many floors have been built of 
Jones & Laughlin Junior Beams, covered 
with a 2- inch slab of concrete. They 
provide excellent protection against fire 
when used in the first floors of houses. 
During the past six years something over 
3,000 such houses, scattered over the 
United States, have been built. 

In the better grade of residences we con- 
fidently expect to see nothing but steel 
framing used in the future. As we are able 
to demonstrate lower costs and better con- 
struction, the introduction of this method 
of building will be universal. 

Before closing, however, I wish to cau- 
tion you against exuberant expectations. 
Steel is not a material that can be success- 
fully handled by the inexperienced. The 
occasional beam or column may be stocked 
by the regular supply vards and erected 
by any good house builder. But to build 
a complete frame, to erect an integrated 
unit, requires the services of persons exper- 
ienced in steel construction. 

We expect, therefore, that, for the pres- 
ent at least, the numerous small steel fab- 
ricating shops, which are now found in all 
towns and cities of any size, can best ad- 
vise you and work with you in the develop- 
ment of better homes in America. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 27 > FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


BRONZE PORTRAIT OF GUNNAR JOHANSEN 
WARREN CHENEY, SCULPTOR 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER | 28 > FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


WHAT IS THE MODERN SCULPTOR 


TRYING TO DO? 


WA. all this dis- 


tortion of the human figure? Why all this 
use of angles and square volumes? Does 
the modern sculptor think he can improve 
the beauty of the human body? What is 
he trying to do? 

These questions, which occur so often to 
the spectator, when voiced, usually make 
the sculptor so angry or so disgusted that 
he walks away without bothering to an- 
swer. Ног to answer them seems both un- 
necessary and beside the point, in face of 
the seeming lack of understanding on the 
part of the spectator. Yet our critic, whose 
major interest is not sculpture, is entitled 
to ask these questions and 
he is entitled to a civil re- 
ply. 

The reason these inter- 
rogations occur is because 
the spectator's training in 
appreciation of the fine 
arts has been wrong. This 
seems a broad statement, 
but the fact is that even 
today, with modernism on 
all sides, our educational 
institutions still persist in 
training appreciation by 
superficial analysis of a 
very few examples of art 
works. The student likes 
what his teacher likes, 
dislikes what his teacher 


Mr. Cheney is lecturer т Madern Art and 
Instructor іп Sculpture. at Mills | College, 
California. He is a son of Charles Н. 
Cheney, City Planner and Landscape Archi- 
tect. 


"OPUS 5°—Carved direct in Alaska Marble 
Warren Cheney, Sculptor 


by 
WARREN CHENEY * 


dislikes, but when confronted with art he 
has not been told to like, he is lost. He 
hardly knows where to begin. The new 
model, unless it possesses great similarity 
to examples he has been taught to admire, 
looks queer and unintelligible. Our spec- 
tator is bewildered because he has been 
taught no aesthetic basis; no aesthetic prin- 
ciples which he could apply to all art forms. 
Not only does he lack aesthetic principles, 
but he has been taught that art cannot be 
defined and that all art theory is generally 
a waste of time. 

Yet as far back as the Fifteenth Cen- 
tury Leonardo da Vinci wrote that all great 
art has solid theory be- 
hind it. And if one accepts 
that master's word, it is 
easily seen that the full 
appreciation of great art 
comes only with under- 
standing of the theory on 
which it is built. T'he spec- 
tator must become con- 
vinced of this point if he 
wishes ever to get beyond 
the stage where only sim- 
ple and obvious beauty 
reaches him. 

The spectators’ idea of 
sculpture formed on a col- 
lege education and visits 
to the major galleries of 
Europe and America, is 
usually something like 
this: "The greatest sculp- 
tors of all time were the 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER 4 29 p> FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


late Fifth and early Fourth century Greeks, 
and the symbol for both perfection of archi- 
tecture and sculpture is the Parthenon. Sec- 
ond only to these Greeks are the great sculp- 
tors of the Renaissance—Donatello, Ver- 
rochio, Michelangelo, Bernini. Since their 
time sculpture has been decadent, with all 
sculptors trying to emulate or outdo the 
Greeks or the Renaissance Italians." 


Now an analysis of these “criterions” of 
sculpture shows genéral adherence to the 
human figure in proportions and in form, 
the only variation coming in surface treat- 
ment; the Greeks generally simplifying an- 
atomical elements, the Renaissance Italians 
generally anatomizing to the full with 
Michelangelo exemplifying the supreme 
anatomist. Literature has built up the repu- 
tation of these sculptors so that to criticize 
them is heresy, and today the symbol for 
manlv beauty is the sculpture of the "Greek 


God”. 


Here is the first and most obvious mis- 
conception: Greek sculpture the pattern 


"MOTHER AND СНП.О”—Сагуе4 direct in Indiana 


Limestone 


Warren Cheney, Sculptor 


for manly beauty—the inference being that 
beauty in sculpture is the idealization of the 
beauty in the human form. The function 
of the true sculptor, however, ancient or 
modern, is not to copy form, but to create 
form. The sculptor is no more than a crafts- 
man if he but copies a human figure, and in 
as far as those Greeks and the Renaissance. 
Italians copied a model, just to that extent 
are they craftsmen, not sculptors. The 
craftsman's reproduction in stone or marble 
of a beautiful body will unquestionably re- 
flect much of the beauty of the living model, 
but this reproduction is not art. Beauty and 
art are not synonymous. Art is beauty cre- 
ated by man. Beauty in nature is only the 
element from which the artist starts in the 
creation of an object of new beauty that’ 
has a spirit of its own not found in nature. 


To have a spirit of its own means, in 
sculpture, not merely the selection of an 
expressive pose but in addition, the crea- 
tion of form which gives the sculpture an 
added spirit —an intensification of the feel- 
ing experienced in nature. The result is 
bound to be a figure which looks like no 
human form one ever saw. Proportions and 
forms are changed, conditioned — what 
fashionable critics would call deforming. 


Until the spectator acquires consider- 
able familiarity with the possibilities and 
limits of sculptural media, the spirit of the 
sculpture remains the one element under- 
standable by anyone. 'The appreciation of 
the organization of volumes, the sense of 
the brittle and intractable nature of stone 
contrasted with the wiry plasticity of metal 
— these elements in.the development of 
taste for sculpture come slowly. Thus, it is 
the spirit of the sculpture, the expressive- 
ness of the sculpture, which the spectator 
should look for. He should put out of mind 
any cannons of beauty or standards of 
human perfection and give himself over en- 
tirely to contemplation of the expressive 
form which makes the sculpture live. 


The "Mother and Child”, conceived 
architecturally, means to express the sin- 
cere hope of a suppliant mother that no 
harm may come to her clinging child. The 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER A 30 № FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


positive space formed by the child and the 
right arm of the mother is balanced by 
the negative space surrounding the left arm 
—the latter expressing the emptiness which 
would fill the mother's heart should her 
child be lost. The piece is purposely kept 
stony and sculptural, eliminating the senti- 
mentality which so often characterizes this 
subject. 


"Opus 5” is an interpretation of the 
quiet lyricism of repose, dormant life about 
to be come active, expressed through the 
very whiteness of the marble, the contrast 
in textures, and principally through the 
rhythm of the related volumes. 


In sharp contrast is a bronze “Torso”, 
which has the appearance of nature closely 
followed yet underneath the surface-anat- 
omy is discovered a conditioning of propor- 
tions and an organization of volumes cal- 
culated to give the piece a feeling of up- 
flowing spirit. Due tolackof space “Torso” 
is not illustrated in this article. 


In the twice life-size bronze head of 
"Gunnar Johansen” the personality of the 
musician is rendered in a frankly romantic 
manner. The intention is to interpret the 
greatness of the pianist through the very 
size of the head, and to create an expres- 
sion of concentration and sensitivity felt in 
the young Dane when he is at the piano- 
forte. 


“Рап”, god of the woods, is half human 
and half goat. А wild untamed creature 
never seen in a static pose, his little smile 
bespeaking his mischievious nature, his 
eyes large and wise with an ageless youth. 
he interprets a playful mood suited to gar- 
den sculpture. 


"Opus 6": great tragedy—as that of a 
mother who has lost her child—interpreted 


Editors Note: "Mother and Child" and "Opus 6" were 
recently at the City of Paris galleries with the first annual 
exhibition of a group of progressive California painters and 
sculptors. ...... "Pan" graces the Gothic Court of the 
Legion of Honor in San Francisco as the fountain piece. . . 
The portrait of "Gunnar Johansen” was on view during 
last October at the Beaux Arts Gallerie. The relief, "Elec- 
trical Power" on the cover has just been completed and 
was to have been seen with the Progressive Exhibit but 
due to its largeness, it was found out of proportion with the 
intimate scale of the City of Paris Galleries. 


through heavy masses of stone. Here is 
woman weighted by a tremendous grief, 
her profound despair expressed by the 
droop of the head, the slump of the torso. 
Yet by her very nature she is forced to go 
on, as felt in the dynamic forward move- 
ment of the legs. The heaviness of propor- 
tions, the elimination of any decorative ele- 
ments, the opposition of the volume move- 
ments, are a conscious effort to express the 
intensity and depth of utter heartbreak— 
not of one woman, but of womankind. 


The relief on the front cover is "Electri- 
cal Power’ expressed through human 
forms made smooth and flowing with me- 
chanical precision to compare with the ma- 
chine forms. The tendency of force to act 
in straight lines is interpreted bv the direct 
uninterrupted movement of the planes. 
Color is used here, reviving the practice 
followed by the ancient Greeks and Egyp- 
tians, but instead of being suggestive of 
realistic coloring the colors are chosen 
purely to intensify the expression of cold 
electrical power. 


"OPUS 6°—Warren Cheney Sculptor 
(For detailed description see text) 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 31 » FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


“PAN’—CARVED DIRECT IN CALIFORNIA TUFA STONE 
WARREN CHENEY, SCULPTOR 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 32 > FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


EFFECT OF RETRENCHMENT ON HOUSING 


AND OFFICE SPACE 


Wy... the cumula- 


tive effects of the past three years of de- 
pression, there has developed a state of 
mind concerning building which has been 
far-reaching in its unsettling effect. Talk 
to any contractor, builder, investor, profes- 
sional man, or layman, and you will re- 
ceive a chorus to the effect that new build- 
ings will not appear for a long. long time. 
There are too many homes hanging over 
the market. There is too much office space 
available, even in the finest buildings. 

The natural sequel to such an attitude is 
that business in general—so much of which 
depends on construction—is destined for a 
very long wait before it can expect any sort 
of a pick-up. This “licked before you 
start” reasoning is bound to deepen the 
gloom in which we find ourselves; further- 
more. it militates against that basic, more 
sober type of.reasoning which is not only 
so conspicuous Бу: its absence, but is so 
necessary for the laying of that foundation 
upon which we hope to erect a stable 
regime. 

By wav of mental exercise and relaxa- 
tion. let us take a deep breath and see what 
kind of a picture presents itself in response 
to our efforts. 

In the outlving districts of our cities there 
are many "For Sale" and "For Rent" 
signs—a definite indication that there are 
more than enough houses to go around. 
Yet, real estate men tell us that the distress 
house situation has cleared up. Why then 
are so many vacant? The answer is largely 
to be found in the recent so-called "doub- 
ling-up" movement of families. The young 
man with а family, living in a nice home, 
gets a salary cut. À few months later comes 


another one. He becomes not only discour- 
aged, but (and this is important) he gets 
scared. [п many cases this young man can 
still scrape by, but with the constant fear 
of another slash in his salary, or possibly 
the final loss of his job, he takes his wife 
to one side to talk the situation over. The 
resultant feeling is "If we could rent or 
sell this house, we could live with inother 
till this whole business blows over." Two 
weeks later finds the young man living with 
his family, and his wife and junior are stay- 
ing at hers. One more sign is added to the 
growing list. 

Is this situation a permanent one? It is 
decidedly not. Two families never could 
lead a happy existence under one roof, and 
they are not going to begin now. Just as 
soon as our young couple can see a ray of 
hope in general conditions, they are going 
right back to their own home. 


We said that our young couple had a 
child. This brings in another important 
factor, namely our ever-increasing popula- 
tion. Couple with this the fact that there 
is a never-ending rate of home obsolesc- 
ence, and we find yet another strong fac- 
tor for our picture. 


Now let us look at the cities. With some- 
what the same mental process which moti- 
vated our young couple. we find many an 
office manager receiving instructions to cut 
down. In many cases offices are discontin- 
ued, and all clerical work is taken to the 
factory—for we suppose there is plenty of 
space available there. In similar instances, 
the amount of office space is reduced. Fre- 
quently, those having offices in the better 
buildings, give up their high rent quarters 
and move to second- or third-rate struc- 
tures. 


4 :: р 


Our answer to this situation is along the 
same lines as in the case of our homes. 
Just as soon as that ray of hope appears 
on the horizon there is going to be a real 
shifting of offices. It will not be long before 
the comparatively small amount of modern 
office space available will be all taken up. 
The second- and third-rate buildings will 
no longer appear so attractive to prospec- 
tive tenants. The factories will soon mani- 
fest their eagerness to reopen city offices, 
and the movement will be well under way. 

Already we can find numerous instances 
where old buildings have been or are being 
torn down. [t is cheaper to pay taxes on 
the land when no building is standing on 


it. Meanwhile, that land pays well as park- 
ing space for automobiles. And right there 
we have a real potential building program 
which in effect will substitute modern rent- 
able offices for obsolete, undesirable and 
unhealthy loft space. 

Well, our picture doesn't look so terribly 
bad after all. And in painting it we have 
learned a few things. Above all we have 
learned that we need not become too dis- 
couraged. For those of us who have real 
merchandise and service to sell, it will mean 
some good hard plugging, but the writer 
cannot recall a time when that ever did any- 
one any harm.—Philip K. Brown, Bon-Air 
Radiator Corporation. 


Courtesy Camera Crajt 


MEDAL PRINT, “LIVING BRONZE" 


Alexander Leventon 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER =й 34 p FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


Jonn Garen Howamp, Е.А Т.А. 


ite Graphic Side of 
a Great Architect s 


Accomplishments 


Howard, former head of the School of 


Architecture, University of California, 


First of a Series of Portfolios of Sketches 
and Delineations by the late John Galen 


Berkeley. 


Republication prohibited except by special permission of Mrs. John Galen Howard. 


<< 35> 


HOWARD'S BIRTHPLACE AT CHELMSFORD, MASSACHUSETTS 


НЕВЕ IS А PERSPECTIVE AND 
PLANS OF MR. HOWARD'S 


FIRST CONSTRUCTED BUILDING 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 36 » FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


2 

| P Ж 

NA A ut i. - 
T TN 


sd 


= : 
NON 
X UNITA 
A Т Wj, r 
leid tte 


ZER 
= 


THIS GRAPHIC SKETCH FOR A HUNTING “BOX” (LODGE) 
WAS MADE BY MR. HOWARD IN 1885 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ж 37 » FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


ADOTONHOSL JO &.ID.LLLSNI SLLASNHƏYSSYN (6881) аАЧҮМОН Мялуо NHOÍ 
.HOGRId V NO учаяхя NY. 'NDISHG NI WA IHO?d 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER я 38 b FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


АООТОМНЭЯІ HO ALNLILSNI S.LLASNHOVSSWIN (6981) ачуллон МЯЛУО МНО! 
«AV ANUIV.LLS TV LNANNNOW V., 'NOISHG NI излаоча 


7 ІІ 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 39 > FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


iT И à 
} E 


(е. 


ny | 
"in м, Js ) 


m Pie 


1) 


К 2” = 


AVY, E й Е 
ке DC me 
Es е x 2 

ТЕРУ bl 


A SKETCH IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA 
Initialed and dated 1888 


а 1 M 5 
; кү ў qut 


4 


eid je 


Ж Б 


у 


i B 


Арика өр. ыр Алем SE devi E - y 


les ÄNGELE 5- 


WHAT OUR CALIFORNIA ARCHITECTS ARE BUILDING TODAY 
This pen sketch of an adobe farm house was made by Mr. Howard in 1888 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 40 » FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


CORNER OF MUSIC ROOM, LOOKING INTO ENTRANCE 
HALLWAY, HOUSE IN PIEDMONT, CALIFORNIA 


CLARENCE А. TANTAU, ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ж 41 № FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


LIVING ROOM IN PIEDMONT HOME 
CLARENCE A. TANTAU, ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E] 42 [> FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


VICISSITUDES OF A YOUNG ARCHITECT 


Fourth of a Series of Reminiseent Sketches of 
the Early Architectural Practice of the Author 


Was the job in 


Hollywood petered out I moved to Mon- 
rovia, where I purchased a spirited young 
saddle horse that had never been thor- 
oughly broken, and by riding and playing 
tennis proceeded to further build up my 
health. I constructed a corral for my horse 
in a grove of eucalyptus trees up against 
the foothills, and for awhile lived in a tent 
next to it, taking my meals in a house near 
by. One moonlight night he broke out of 
the corral and ran into a nearby orange 
orchard, and it is just too bad that аз I 
chased him around in my pajamas trying 
to catch him I did not have an audience. 


Frequently I rode out Sunday mornings 
toward Pasadena and for several succes- 
sive Sundays by pre-arrangement met Mr. 
Myron Hunt, the architect, half-way, after 
which we would ride around together. My 
land-lady, who was a strict church-goer, 
finally took me to task for this procedure, 
saying, “I don't know what it is that takes 
you away from church every Sunday morn- 
ing, but I can tell you one thing. that no 
good will come of it.” She was a poor 


by 
ELMER GREY, F- А А. 


prophetess and also a poor moralist. For 
my rides with Mr. Hunt finally eventuated 
in a partnership which proved to be any- 
thing but what she predicted. She was a 
poor moralist because she had two sons 
who were forest rangers, a part of whose 
duty it was to see that no deer were killed 
out of season. Yet while I took my meals 
there five deer were killed out of season 
and served up at the table with a wink by 
their mother! 


I taught my horse to be bridle-wise, but 
put him in the hands of a trainer to break 
to harness, and he was finally pronounced 
harness broken. I then decided to sell him 
and placed a liner in the paper advertis- 
ing him as “perfectly gentle and harness 
broken”. For some reason they ran the ad 
much longer than I had intended and in 
the meantime I tried him in harness myself. 
What happened was described in an article 
in the Monrovia newspaper in a column 
which appeared right next to the ad still 
running describing him as perfectly gentle 
and harness broken. It read as follows:— 

“A lively runaway occurred on Myrtle 
avenue Monday evening and horses, carts. 
wagons and young men gave a lightning 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 43 » FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


PNE EE Р 


аа Й 


HUNTINGTON ART GALLERY, SAN MARINO, CALIFORNIA 
Myron Hunt and Elmer Grey, Architects 


exhibition of what things animate and in- 
animate can do upon a moment's notice. 
Elmer Grey, a guest at the La Vista 
Grande, was driving a partly broken horse 
down Lemon Avenue when the animal 
started on a wicked run. It had its head 
down and was making a bee-line for the 
Sunset Telephone office, probably in an- 
swer to a call of long distance, when it 
struck Renaker's furniture wagon amid- 
ships. For a sickening second or so Mr. 
Grey, the horse, cart, wagon and Taylor 
Renaker were mixed to a finish, but fortu- 
nately injuries were not serious. Mr. Grey 
was badly cut about the head but is recov- 
ering rapidly." 

Needless to say I did not sell my horse 
in Monrovia! [ should add, however, that 
I did sell him later for three times what I 


CHRISTIAN SCIENCE CHURCH, MILWAUKEE В T A 
Elmer Grey, Architect paid for him. He never lost his love for 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 44 » FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


the wilds. Frequently when I rode him 
into the mountains it was with difficulty 
that [ could get him to return to the habi- 
tats of man. Finally, I sold him in Pasadena 
to a liveryman for his own private mount 
and he later sold him as a trick animal to 
the movies. 


In my partnership with Mr. Hunt the 
arrangement at first was that I should 
spend only a short time each day in the 
office until my nerves got in better shape. 
My financial interest was therefore slight 
at first. So, after spending all these months 
knocking about I began to feel sadly in 
need of funds. When my practice in Mil- 
waukee broke up my affairs were turned 
over to a relative who, of course, was not 
very familiar with many of its aspects— 
and I never went back to straighten them 
out. He had long since informed me that 
all the funds due from my former commis- 
sions had been collected, so I had nothing 
to expect from that quarter. 


One morning when I was feeling particu- 
larly hard up I came to the office to find a 
letter from the secretary of the Milwaukee 
Christian Science church which read: — 
"We have for a long time been awaiting 
your final bill for services rendered in con- 
nection with our church edifice. Not having 
heard from you about it and not wishing 
to have the account run longer we have fig- 
ured up the amount we believe is still due 
you and enclose our check for $400. 


It was like manna from Heaven! 

My partnership with Mr. Hunt lasted 
several years during which we planned the 
Henry E. Huntington residence (now the 
Huntington Art Gallery) the central build- 
ing for the California Institute of Tech- 
nology and much other important work. It 
gave me a start in California which, as a 
stranger with impaired health, I might 
otherwise have found it difficult to secure. 

(To be continued ) 


Vicissitudes 
of a Young 
Architect 


This series of entertain- 
ing sketches by . . . . 


ЕСЕ ЕР R 
ОУ 


the last of which is pub- 
lished this month, has 
aroused so much interest 
that the Editor has asked 
Mr. Grey to extend the 
installment. . . The au- 
thor has promised to do 
so and in his next two 
articles he will describe 
his experiences during a 
trip to the South Sea Isl- 
ands. . . Оле of the 
passengers aboard the 
steamer which took Mr. 
Grey to the Islands, and 
who later experienced a 
tragic death, was at that 
time a close friend of a 
very prominent San Fran- 
cisco architect. . 


Don't {ай to read Mr. Grey's graphic 
account of his South Sea Island exper- 


ience, beginning with the 
March number. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 45 P FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


Courtesy Camera Craft 


"SUNLIGHT: PENNSYLVANIA DEPOT" 
Irving Menchik 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER я 46 в- FEBRUARY, МІМЕТЕЕМ THIRTY-THREE 


Engineering 
and 


Building Construction 


b a Се 
> — 


The Story of How the 
California State Division 
of Highways Salvaged an 


Old Steel Girder Bridge 
by lurning it Upside Down 


SALVAGING AN OLD STEEL BRIDGE 


га 22 
р: лт” 
°С. ^ 12 
ы T В E ГА Жез. PO i 
5 ше акы аа ағы eo ey бы. er I E Эъ з ры 


Before taking the upside-down treatment, the old Castaic Creek Bridge had been relegated to 
the limbo of the forgotten past by the progress of road engineering. Improved alignment and 
grades left it an abandoned, obsolete structure with an old type 21-foot roadway. 


D d Eau 
 —Y — — M Лас” ж ERE] | * — '"- .-» = NEG i | eme 
( 


о 
WITH NEW WIDE В [АУ 


View of bridge after taking the surgical treatment that dismembered it and turned the 80-foot 
steel girders bottom-side up. It ís now a perfectly modern structure with a 34-foot roadway, 
spanning Los Alamos Creek, on the new Ridge Route alternate. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 48 y FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


OLD BRIDGE CHANGED TO NEW ONE ВУ 
REVERSING STEEL GIRDERS 


ЯІС: bridge depart- 


ment of the California State Division of 
Highways, has given the engineering pro- 
fession something to talk about. It is not 
unusual to dismantle an old steel bridge 
and re-erect it in a new location, but it is 
seldom one hears of a bridge being turned 
upside down and made into a new one on 
virtually the same site as it has stood and 
served its purpose for years. 

Such a salvaging operation was ac- 
complished by the bridge department of the 
California Division of Highways, when an 
old plate girder bridge on the state high- 
way at Castaic Creek was transferred to 
the Ridge Route Alternate at Los Alamos 
Creek, and it is probably the only one of 
its kind on record. Three 80-ft. steel plate 
girders carried a 21-ft. roadway over Cas- 
taic Creek. Turned upside down they now 
carry a 34-ft. roadway over Los Alamos 
Creek. 

Writing of this achievement in Califor- 
nia Highways and Public Works, official 
state publication, L. C. Hollister, associate 
bridge designing engineer at Sacramento, 
says: 

On the relocation of the Ridge Route 
between Los Angeles and Bakersfield, 
where many steep grades and sharp curves 
have been eliminated, there are seven 
bridges, four across Piru Creek, one across 
Gorman Creek, and two across Los Alamos 
Creek. At Los Alamos Creek, Station 83, 
it appeared from the field data submitted, 
that a structure about 220 feet long. con- 


sisting of approximately one 80-foot and 
two 72-foot spans would be required. 

At Castaic Creek on the Los Angeles 
end of the line change, there were thrown 
out of use, due to improved alignment and 
grades, three 80-foot steel girder spans. 
'l'hese girders were of the "through" type, 
that is, the narrow 21-foot roadway passed 
through the girders, the girders taking the 
place of a railing. 

The girders, however, were in excellent 
condition and being of practically the same 
length as those required at Los Alamos 
Creek, it was conceived that they might in 
some way be made use of at the new loca- 
tion. 

Accordingly, preliminary investigations 
were made to see if such a thing would be 
feasible and practical, and preliminary esti- 
mates were made to see if it would be more 
economical to move the old girders than to 
build entirely new ones. These investiga- 
tions and estimates showed that it was both 
practical and economical to move the old 
girders and refabricate them to meet the 
new conditions. 

The work consisted of the following: 

1. Removing old concrete floor. 

2. Dismantling and removing old gird- 

ers, floor beams and bracing. 

3. Transporting old structural steel to 

the new location. 

4. Fabricating the old steel to meet the 

new requirements and conditions. 

5. Erecting the steel on the new piers 

and abutments. 

Removing the old concrete floor was 
done with air drills and hammers, care be- 
ing taken not to injure the structural steel. 


4 5 р 


Dismantling the structural steel was 
more of a job, as about 4500 steel rivets had 
to be removed in order to disconnect the 
floor beams and bracing and to divide each 
girder into two parts so that they could be 
transported. 

Moving the steel to the new location was 
done by trucks and trailers. The traffic law 
requires that no vehicle plus the load shall 
exceed a length of 75 feet. This meant that 
the 80-foot girders had to be cut at the 
splices and hauled in separate pieces. 

After the old steel arrived at the new 
location, the fabrication was started. New 
steel plates and angles were added to form 
new brackets and new bracing and 1300 
holes were drilled through the old steel to 
form connections for the new steel. The 
old bearing shoes were removed from the 
bottoms of the girders and put on the tops. 

Erecting the refabricated girders on the 
new piers and abutments followed. This 
time they were erected completely upside 
down compared to their original position. 
Following the erection the steel was thor- 
oughly cleaned, sand blasted, and given 
three new coats of paint, and a final coat 
of aluminum paint. 

Two of the 80-ft. girders were cut off at 
one end to make the exact spans. The gird- 
ers were set 26 ft. apart center to center. 
А reinforced concrete deck 9 in. thick. pro- 
viding a roadway 34 ft. wide, was con- 
structed on top of the girders, supported 
by beams inside and brackets outside the 
girders, these being spaced 10 ft. on cen- 
ters. The concrete slab was reinforced 
longitudinally. А concrete curb was built 
on the outside edge of the slab on either 
side and a wooden guard rail was set in 
this curb. Holes were made in the. curbs 
for the posts. These were coated with 
asphalt and the posts were fastened in with 
cement grout. 

Approximately 72,000 Ibs. of new steel 
for brackets, braces, etc., were required for 
the job. : 

А. B. Willett, E. Н. McBroom and M. 
Palmieri were assigned to the design in the 
bridge department. Victor А. Endersbv of 
the Los Angeles office of the department, 
had supervision of the work. A. K. Gil- 
bert was resident engineer. 


ARTIFICIAL EARTHQUAKES AID 
ENGINEERS IN SHOCK TESTS 


AITH the development of a 6,000 pound 

АА] vibration table in the Stanford Uni- 
versity mechanical engineering laboratory, 
experts are able to create on a small scale 
the effects of earthquakes. 


So far, the large table, which resembles 
a flat car, can only shake to and fro. Engi- 
neers working with Dr. Lydik S. Jacobsen, 
associate professor of mechanical engineer- 
ing, are planning to produce sideway 


shocks. 


The object of this earthquake "factory" 
is to test the shock-resistance of various 
structures, in order that more may be 
learned of the force of real earth disturb- 
ances on such heavy constructions as office 
buildings, dams and bridges. From these 
experiments engineers hope to devise meth- 
ods of improving present quake-proof ar- 
chitecture. 


Held in place by a heavy steel spring, 
the table receives severe impacts from a 
1,000-pound pendulum while miniature 
structures, somewhat like the framework 
of a skyscraper, are placed upon it. With 
the aid of a high-speed movie camera it is 
possible to observe where the models suffer 
the worst strain. Thus it can be determined 
where buildings would be most likely to 
collapse and where reinforcements are most 
needed. 


The pendulum is supplemented by an 
unbalanced flywheel mounted on the table. 
This produces the continued vibrations 
often occurring in real quakes. 


With another type of apparatus, shocks 
have been manufactured that approximate 
the force of the 1923 Tokio disaster on a 
proportionate scale. 


Despite the value of the quake-machine 
in improving building construction, Dr. 
Jacobsen cautions that danger cannot be 
completely eliminated in all cases, as some 
existing structures are unavoidably men- 
aced by their location on geologic fault- 
lines. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER | 50 > FEBRUARY, NINETEEN ТН1ВТУ-ТНВЕХ 


« « « « With the Architects » » » » 


NURSES' HOME 

There are prospects of an architect being em- 
ployed to prepare plans for a new Nurses' Home 
at the San Francisco City and County Hospital, 
at an estimated cost of $250,000. This money is 
to be made available from a fund of $500,000 
originally intended to be spent for a building at 
the County Hospital. 

Another prospective commission for a San 
Francisco architect is a new building at the Ag- 
new State Hospital near San Jose. A bill author- 
izing the expenditure of $350,000 for such a struc- 
ture has been introduced in the State Legislature. 


BAYWOOD RESIDENCE 

Chester Н. Treichel, architect, 679 Haddon 
Road, Oakland, has completed plans and specifi- 
cations for a Spanish style stucco residence in 
Baywood, San Mateo County, for Preston Deitz, 
1110 Grove Street, Burlingame. The house will 
cost $10,000. 

The same architect has also prepared drawings 
for an English farm house in Baywood for an un- 
named owner to cost $11,000. 


GROUP OF STUCCO HOMES 

R. R. Irvine, 2048 Market Street, San Fran- 
cisco, is preparing plans for a group of one-story 
and basement stucco dwellings to be erected on 
36th Avenue, north of Kirkham Street, San Fran- 
cisco, at an estimáted cost of $5,500 each. The 
houses will be built around a patio as originated 
by the firm of Irvine and Ebbets. 


MONTEREY BUILDING 

The American Railway Express Company will 
have a new building at Monterey from plans by 
Alexander McBain, Wells Fargo Building, San 
Francisco. The company will lease the property 
from Mrs. Lulu В. Bussey. The building will be 
70x25 feet, one-story concrete, and will cost 
$10,000. 


RENO COLONIAL RESIDENCE 
Plans have been completed by F. J. de Long- 
champs, Reno Gazette Building, Reno, for a 
$45,000 Colonial residence in Reno Юг Г. Р. 
Graham. 


OAKLAND STORE BUILDING 

Plans have been completed by Albert J. Evers, 
525 Market Sttreet, San Francisco, for a one- 
story, basement and mezzanine class C store 
building to be erected on Broadway, north of 19th 
Street, Oakland, for the 20th and Broadway 
Realty Company. Earl Cope is the structural 
engineer. The new building has been leased by 
Charles Kushins, formerly in charge of Roos 
Brothers shoe department. 


ARNOLD S. CONSTABLE BUSY 

A revival of work in the office of Arnold S. 
Constable, architect, 580 Market Street, San 
Francisco, includes a two-story and basement 
brick rectory and an addition to St. Vincent's 
Church, Vallejo, to cost $45,000, and the revision 
of plans for a building in Berkeley for Albert the 
Great College, from a Class C to Class А struc- 
ture. 


COUNTRY HOUSE 

W. С. Ambrose, 244 Kearny Street, San Fran- 
cisco, is preparing plans for an Eastern client for 
a part one and part two story rustic farmhouse 
to be erected at Inverness, Marin County, this 
spring, at a cost of $14.000. The house will have 
seven rooms, three baths and garage, split shake 
exterior, shingle roof, stone fireplace, etc. 


WATSONVILLE STORE BUILDING 
William Н. Weeks, 525 Market Street, San 
Francisco, is the architect and part owner of a 
one-story reinforced concrete store building to be 
erected in Watsonville and to be occupied by a 
chain store. The estimated cost is $7,500. 


CANNERY WAREHOUSE 
A one-story brick warehouse is to be erected at 
9th and Mission Streets, San Jose, by the Austin 
Company of California for the Continental Can 
Company. Improvements will cost about $22,000. 


OAKLAND FACTORY 
A $12,000 brick factory will be erected on 16th 
Avenue, near East 12th Street, Oakland, from 
plans by W. E. Schirmer, architect, Financial 
Center Building, Oakland. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 51 > FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


NEW CURE FOR DEPRESSION 

At a recent meeting of the Illinois Society of 
Architects їп Chicago, ап "Unemployment Рго- 
gram" which had been prepared and circulated by 
Hjalmar Cederstrom, a noted architect of Stock- 
holm, was read and discussed at the request of 
President Fugard. Mr. Cederstrom considers "an 
antiquated education" as the basic cause of the 
present world crisis. He says "an education, the 
only object of which is to make individuals fit for 
competition, teaches youth that the main thing 
in life is to obtain a safe position in society. 
Must not such an education always result in a 
struggle between individuals in which the strong- 
est tramples on the weakest, and must not this 
struggle consequently lead to a World war?" He 
eloquently pleads for "an education based more 
on human nature” in which the youth of the world 
is taught other valuations to life than things 
merely material. 

Dealing directly with the unemployment ques- 
tion he advocates an active policy of public works 
to be carried on steadily and in times of depres- 
sion, like today, greatly accelerated. He specifies 
two essentials to a public works program: (1) lt 
must provide work for the unemployed. (2) lt 
must provide a future means of livelihood for cer- 
tain persons by means of that work. 

Mr. Cederstrom is against any form of "dole" 
but points out the grave dangers which will re- 
sult from sudden or forced economies. He then 
suggests the type of work which should be allo- 
cated to youth and that reserved for the aged or 
infirm. In the new era upon which the world has 
entered he says: "The point is to find work and 
means of support for a great number of people 
without everybody deriving profit from the work 
that has to be done." He further says, "When it 
is a question of choosing the branch (of industry) 
to which the new work should be allocated, our 
thorough investigations into the matter have con- 
vinced us that it should be placed in that branch 
which in most countries forms the key to the in- 
dustrial structure—the building trade" and shows 
how only very large building projects can really 
influence the supply of work. All this is sound 
and thoroughly in accord with the findings of 
President Hoover's "Housing and Home Building 
Conference" held in Washington, December, 1931. 
Mr. Cederstrom lays great stress on the necessity 
of an international program of reconstruction, if 
any solution for the present world-wide distress is 
to be arrived at. 


SIGNIFICANCE OF ENGINEERS' DAY 


Ву ]озЕРН HARRINGTON 

An occasion on which the best minds of the 
world foregather to exchange ideas, cannot fail 
to have the greatest significance for all those in- 
terested in the subject touched upon. This is 
especially so when the agenda provides a direc- 
tional influence towards those things so iritimately 
touching our every day lives, as will be the case 
on "Engineers! Day" at A Century of Progress 
next June. 

On this day, especially set apart and dedicated 
to the engineer, will be presented to the world a 
marvelous series of demonstrations of the wonders 
wrought by science since the founding of Chi- 
cago. That engineers may see the fruits of their 
own efforts, every mechanical, electrical and phys- 
ical piece of apparatus will be in service, produc- 
ing the results that have made this the Age of 
Wonder. Exhibitors, realizing the critical nature 
of their audience, will be on their toes, that their 
equipment may show to best advantage to the 
thousands of understanding visitors who will be 
there. And thousands will be there, for this is the 
great day of the engineer. Nineteen of the na- 
tional societies, with a membership of one hundred 
thousand, have set this day and week for a world- 
wide conclave. Great engineers from all over the 
world will come to see the achievements of Ameri- 
can genius. 

Conferences of the several societies will listen 
to the reading of papers on scientific subjects by 
recognized authorities, and discussions by other 
equally famous engineers. Мо one, either directly 
or indirectly affiliated with industry, can afford 
to miss this opportunity. With the world for an 
audience, the best thoughts of the best minds will 
characterize the discussions. Undoubtedly some 
permanent record will be made, and the history of 
science enriched by the master contributions. 

The part played by engineers in the moulding 
of civilization will be held up to the gaze of the 
world. This marvelous opportunity offered to a 
group of men ordinarily self-effacing, shall not be 
passed without adequate recognition. Man owes 
an incalculable debt to the engineer, the recogni- 
tion of which will serve to dignify and sustain the 
position of the profession and implant in the minds 
of men some idea of his service to humanity. This 
day will indeed signify that the engineer is the 
mainspring of human progress, gladly serving his 
fellow-men and ever ready to heed the call to new 
and better things. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 52 > FEBRUARY, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


MODERN ARCHITECTURE EXHIBIT 


An interesting exhibition of modern art and 
architecture was held at the University of Cali- 
fornia Extension Building, 540 Powell Street, San 
Francisco, in January. 

The exhibition was arranged by Edwin Hunt, 
lecturer on interior decoration for the University 
extension division, both for its educational value 
and as an inspiration to local builders. 


California homes. designed by Frank Lloyd 
Wright and his son, Lloyd Wright, constituted 
one of the most interesting features of the exhibit. 
А skyscraper church in Tulsa, Okla., the work of 
Bruce Goff, was another design of outstanding 
interest. 


Other architects represented were: James Ur- 
ban of New York, Eli Jacques Kahn of New 
York, Miller and Pflueger, and Albert Roller of 
San Francisco. 


VENTURA COUNTY STATE HOSPITAL 


Ап opinion rendered to State Architect George 
B. McDougall, by Attorney General U. S. Webb, 
states that authority to employ practicing archi- 
tects to design the new California State Hospital 
buildings in Ventura County, near Camarillo, is 
vested in the board of managers of the institution, 
He asserts that the board is expressly empowered 
by Section 2151 of the Political Code, authorizing 
the project, to engage architects at its discretion. 
Plans for a portion of the first unit of the hospital 
now are being prepared by the State Architect 
under authorization from the board. Ап airplane 
perspective of the hospital group was published in 
THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER last month. 


A. W. SMITH 


Alfred W. Smith, for over thirty-five years a 
practicing architect in Oakland, died at his home 
in Berkeley early in January after a short illness. 
A native of Louisiana, Mr. Smith had been a resi- 
dent of the Bay Region for nearly sixty-five years. 

Mr. Smith planned a number of well known 
buildings in the East Bay, including the Ebell 
Club, the Gibson Engineering School, and a num- 
ber of sorority and fraternity houses in Berkeley. 

He is survived by his widow, Mrs. Lilias Smith, 
and by two daughters. 


BIG ALTERATION JOB 


Henry Bittman, Securities Building, Seattle, is 
preparing the plans for the transformation of the 
Shopping Tower at Third Avenue and Pine Street 
into headquarters for the Northwestern Mutual 
Fire Association. It is one of the largest remodel- 
ing projects announced this year in Seattle. 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


VENTURA POST OFFICE 

Harold E. Burket, 455 E. Main Street, Ventura, 
has completed working drawings for the United 
States post office building to be erected at the 
corner of Santa Clara and Fir Streets, Ventura. 
In addition to the post office departments, the 
building will provide offices for the Department 
of Agriculture, Department of Labor and the De- 
partment of Internal Revenue. The structure will 
be a one-story and part two-story, California style, 
of architecture, and will cover an area of 146x110 
feet. It will be of masonry and steel construction, 
with cream colored face brick exterior, terra cotta 
trim, stone base course, tile roof, tile floor and 
wainscoting and a redwood ceiling in the lobby. 
Metal windows, vaults, steam heat, etc., will be 
included in the $150,000 structure. 


FOSHAY TOWER SOLD FOR TAXES 

The 32-story Foshay Tower, built in Minne- 
apolis by W. B. Foshay in 1928, has been sold by 
the county auditor to the state, conditionally, for 
taxes. 

Foshay Tower cost over $1,000,000 and the 
state, which was the only bidder, took title for 
$117,500, the amount of the 1929 and 1930 4е- 
linquent taxes. 

At least twice before in the past two or three 
years the building has been put up for auction but 
there have been no bidders. 

The Foshay Building in San Francisco is on 
Kearny Street, between Sutter and Bush Streets. 
It was designed by August Nordin and has been 
vacant for some time. 


THOMAS P. BARBER 

Thomas P. Barber, who died at his home in 
Glendale of heart disease, aged 70 years, was 
widely known in the west as a church architect. 
He came to Los Angeles 10 years ago from Colo- 
rado Springs, Colorado, where he had previously 
practiced for many years. Two notable examples 
of his work are the First Methodist church in 
Pasadena, and the Hollywood Methodist church. 
He also designed the First Methodist church at 
Ventura, the Pacific Palisades church and in asso- 
ciation with Paul R. Kingsbury, the McCarthy 
Memorial church at 4103 W. Adams Street, Los 
Angeles. A 
ARCHITECT GIVEN JUDGMENT 

Judgment of $311 and costs of suit were award- 
ed by Superior Judge James L. Atteridge of Santa 
Cruz to E. L. Norberg, architect, against Robert 
A. Klassen, of San Carlos, for work done on a 
San Carlos apartment house. 

This is $500 less than Norberg was awarded 
at a previous trial, which brought him a judg- 
ment of $835.30. The new trial won by Klassen 
was terminated after a three-day hearing. 


53 


TRADE EXTENSION CLASSES 

Adult trade extension classes, conducted by the 
San Francisco Board of Education for men of the 
building trades, are announced. 

All of the instructors engaged in this educa- 
tional work are outstanding men in the building 
industry and each is a specialist in the field cov- 
ered by the work of his class. 

There will be special classes for the building 
‘trades in plan reading, drafting, architecture, ap- 
plied arithmetic, algebra. geometry and trigonom- 
etry, leveling and surveying and advanced survey- 
ing, and estimating; also timber, concrete and 
structural steel design and construction. 

The classes are conducted in the technical de- 
partment annex, Humboldt Evening High School, 
22nd and Bartlett Streets, San Francisco. 


LOS ANGELES EXHIBITION 

Ар outstanding art event for February 15 to 
28 will be an exhibit of colorful murals by Mar- 
garet А. Dobson in the exhibition rooms of the 
Architects Building, Fifth and Ери Streets, 
Los Angeles. 

Miss Dobson was awarded a medal from the 
French Masters of Fine Arts for decorating a 
school in Paris. While in France she also execut- 
ed decorations for the Church at Montereau, not 
far from Paris, also executed two commissions for 
the hospital at Fontainebleau and a room in the 
Palace at Fontainebleau, a real honor for an 
American artist. 


Since returning to this country Miss Dobson ex- 
ecuted a decoration for one of the Colonial build- 
ings of the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts 
School at Chester Springs, Pennsylvania. She is 
a member of the National Arts Club in New York, 
a member of the Societe des Artists Presquistes, 
Paris. 


EXHIBITIONS 

Several interesting exhibitions have recently 
been sponsored by members of the architectural 
profession and artists in the Bay Region. 

An exhibit of modern architecture was held at 
the Berkeley Women's City Club in connection 
with Frank Lloyd Wright’s lecture on December 
25. Mr. Wright’s subject was "The Future of 
American Architecture." 

Ап exhibition of modern sculpture was held at 
the City of Paris, San Francisco, the latter part 
of January. Warren Cheney, whose work is illus- 
trated in this issue of THE ARCHITECT AND ENGI- 
NEER, was among the exhibitors. 

A splendid exhibition of small houses, ranging 
from $3,500 to $7,500, designed in accordance 
with present day low building costs by the office 


54 


of Edwin L. Snyder, architect, was held February 
1-15 at the Mason-McDuffy studio, 2104 Addi- 
son Street, Berkeley. The interior decorations 
were arranged by Mrs. Harold Keith. The exhibi- 
tion aroused so much interest in Berkeley and 
Oakland that it will be continued for the remain- 
der of the month. 


GOLDEN GATE BRIDGE MANAGER 


James Reed, naval commander and construc- 
tion engineer, has been elected to the post of gen- 
eral manager of the Golden Gate Bridge and 
Highway District, on the recommendation of the 
bridge directors’ policy committee. He succeeds 
Alan MacDonald, resigned. 

Reed was nominated by Director кее, fol- 
lowing his recommendation by a majority of the 
policy committee, which ‘considered more than 
eighty applications. i 

Before the directors voted on Reed, the minor- 
ity report of the policy committee in favor of A. 
W. Deuel, general manager of the San Mateo 
bridge, was presented and appointment of Deuel 
was moved by Director William Stanton. Stan- 
ton's motion failed to carry. The election of Reed 
was made unanimous at the request of the four 
directors who originally voted for Deuel. 

Reed's salary as manager is "not to exceed 
$12,000 a year. 

Reed, at present Tem manager of the Schlage 
Lock Company, has served as a construction ex- 
pert at the Mare Island, Bremerton and Brook- 
lyn navy yards, and as shop о - at the 
Philadelphia yard. 

He was graduated from the United States 
Naval Academy in 1902, and from the Massachu- 
setts Institute of Technology in 1907. 

Since his retirement from the Navy, he has 
acted as construction expert on a number of large 
projects. 


STOCKTON EXHIBITION 

An architectural building exhibit is planned for 
early spring by the Stockton members of the State 
Association of Architects. | 

The purpose of the exhibit is to show with 
sketches and photographs the necessity of intelli- 
gent designing in planning and erection of new 
buildings and the renovation of old structures, ac- 
cording to L. G. Ernst, member of the publicity 
committee, 

Committees arranging for the exhibit are: Lo- 
cation, Victor Galbraith and Joseph Losekann; 
finance, Frank Mayo and Peter Sala; publicity, 
Glen Allen and E. G. Ernst; school and poster 
competition, Howard Bissell; prizes, J. Clowdsley 
and Ralph Morrell. 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


Estimator’s Guide 


Giving Cost of Building Materials, Wage Scale, Etc. 


Amounts quoted are figuring prices and are made up from average quotations 
furnished by material houses to three leading contracting firms of San Francisco. 


All prices and wages quoted are for 
San Francisco and the Bay District. 
There may be slight fluctuation of 
prices in the interior and southern 
part of the state. Freight cartage, at 
least, must be added in figuring coun- 
try work. 

Overtime in wage scale should be 
credited with time and a half, Sunday 
and holidays double. 


Волӣ—11 % amount of contract. 


Brickwork— 

Common, $26 to $32 per 1000 laid, 
(according to class of work). 

Face, $60 to $80 per 1000 laid, (ac- 
cording to class of work). 

Brick Steps, using pressed brick, 
$.85 lin. ft. 

Brick Walls, using pressed brick on 


edge, 55с sq. ft. (Foundations ex- 
tra.) 

Brick Veneer on frame buildings, 
$.60 sq. #6. 

Common, f. o. b. cars, $14.00 plus 
cartage. 

Face, f.o.b. cars, $38.00 per 1000, 


carload lots. 

HOLLOW TILE FIREPROOFING (f.o.b. job) 
3%12х12 in. $ 68.00 per M 
4x12x12 in. ... 76.50 per М 
6x12x12 in. .. 105.00 per M 
(es) ОДО ей 170.00 per M 

HOLLOW BUILDING TILE (f.o.b. job) 
carload lots). 
8х12х5% ... ... $76.50 
ана ан E 59.50 


Composition Floors — 18c to 30c per 
Sq. ft. In large quantities, 18c per 
Sq. ft. laid. 

Mosaie Floors—80c per sq. ft. 

Duraflex Floor—23c to 30c sq. ft. 

Rubber Tile—50c per sq. ft. 

Terazzo Floors—40c to 55c per sq. ft. 


Terazzo Steps—$1.50 lin. ft. 


Conerete Work (material at San Fran- 
cisco bunkers) — Quotations below 
2000 Ibs. to the ton. 


No. 8 rock, at bunkers........ $1.65 per ton 
No. 4 rock, at bunkers...... 1.65 per ton 
Elliott top gravel, at bnkrs, 1.75 per ton 
Washed gravel, at bunkrs 1.75 per ton 
Eliott top gravel, at bnkrs. 1.75 per ton 
City gravel, at bunkers.... 1.40 per ton 
River sand, at bunkers...... 1.50 per ton 
Delivered bank sand............ 1.10 cu yd. 


Note—Above prices are subject to dis- 
count of 10c per ton on invoices paid 
on or before the 15th of month, fol- 
lowing delivery. 

SAND 


Del Monte, $1.75 to $3.00 per ton. 
Fan Shell Beach (саг lots, f.o.b. 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


Lake Majella), $2.75 to $4.00 per 

ton. . 
Cement, $2.25 рег bbl Іп paper sks. 
Cement (f.o.b. Job, S. Е.) $2.45 per 


bbl. 
Cement (f.o.b. Job, Oak.) $2.45 per 
per bb 
Rebate of 10 cents hbl. cash in 15 
days. 
Medusa “White” .......... $ 8.50 per bbl. 


Forms, Labors average 22.00 per M. 
Average cost of concrete in place, 

exclusive of forms, 28c per cu. ft. 
4-inch concrete basement 

loops 5 12%с to 131%с рег sq. ft. 
4% jnch Concrete Basement 

ШОО с со 13c to 14с per sq. ft. 
2-inch rat-proofing....64c per sq. ft. 
Concrete Steps.......... $1.00 per lin. ft. 


Dampproofing and Waterproofing— 
Two-coat work, 15с per yard. 
Membrane waterproofing—4 layers 

of saturated felt, $4.00 per square. 
Hot coating work, $1.80 per square. 
Meduca Waterproofing, 15c рег Ib., 
San Francisco Warehouse. 


Electric Wiring — $2.75 to $8.50 per 
outlet for conduit work (including 


switches). 

Knob and tube average $2.25 to 
$5.00 per outlet, including 
switches. 

Elevators— 


Prices vary according to capacity, 
speed and type. Consult elevator 
companies. Average cost of in- 
stalling an automatic elevator in 
four-story building, $2450; direct 
automatic, about $2400. 


Excavation— 

Sand, 40 cents; clay or shale, 90c 
per yard. 

Teams, $10.00 per day. 

Trucks, $18 to $25 per day. 

Above figures are an average with- 
out water. Steam shovel work in 
large quantities, less; hard ma- 
terial, such as rock, will run con- 
siderably more. 


Fire Eseapes— 
Ten-foot balcony, with stairs, 
$65.00 per balcony. 


Glass (consult with manufacturers)— 

Double strength window glass, 15c 
per square foot. 

Quartz Lite, 50c per square foot. 
Plate 80c per square foot. 

Art, $1.00 up per square foot. 

Wire (for skylights), 27c per square 
foot. 

Obscure glass, 25c square foot. 

Note—Add extra for setting. 


Heating— 
Average, $1.60 per sq. ft. of radia- 
tion, according to conditions. 


lron—Cost of ornamental iron, cast 
iron, etc., depends on designs. 
Lumber (prices delivered to bldg. site) 
Common, $18.00 per M (average). 
Common О.Р. select, average, $22.00 


per M. 
1x6 No, 3--Form Lumber ........... $14.00 per M 
1x4 No. 1 flooring VG .. .. 42.00 per М 


.. 36.00 рег М 
30.00 рег М 
42.00 рег М 
50.00 рег М 


1х4 No, 2 flooring .. 
1x4 No. 3 flooring 
1x6 No, 2 flooring .. 
1х4 and 6 No. 2 


Slash grain— 


ТАМО осоЕ соо $30.00 рег М 
1x4 No. 3 flooring .......... . 26.00 per M 
No. 1 common run Т. & С........ 26.00 per M 
тал 4.15 per M 


Shingles (add cartage to prices 
quoted)— 


Redwood. No. 1 .....- 
Redwood, No. 2 
Red Cedar 


2e» $ «85 per bdle. 
... „65 per bdle. 
.85 per bdle. 


Hardwood Flooriug (delivered to 


huilding)— 
13-16x31," T & С Maple .......... $ 90.00 M ft. 
1 1-16х214” T & С Maple -. 117.00 M ft. 
78х31 sq. edge Maple ............... 110.00 M ft. 
19-16x2!4" 34х2” 5-16х2” 
T&G T&G  Sq.Ed. 


Cir. Qtd. Oak ....5175.00 M $125.00 M $158 M 


Sel. Qtd. Oak ... 115.00 М 95.00 М 110M 
Clr. Pla. Oak ... 110.00 M 87.00M 95M 
Sel. Pla. Oak -~~ 106.00 M 68.00 М 82M 
Clear Maple ........ 110.00 М 82.00 М 

Laying & Finishing 140 4, 124. Пей, 


Wage—Floor layers, $9.00 per day. 


Duilding Paper— 


1 ply per 1000 ft. roll... $2.65 
2 ply per 1000 ft. roll... _ 4.00 
3 ply per 1000 ft. roll... e 6.00 
Sisalkraft, 500 ft. roll... - 6.00 


1.00 per 100 ft. 
1.10 per 100 ft. 
1.60 per 100 ft. 
1.90 per 100 ft. 
5.00 ton 


Sash cord 
Sash cord com. No. 8 
Sash cord spot No. 7... 
Sash cord spot No. 8... 
Sash weights cast iron, 
Nails, $2.85 base. 
Belgian nails, $2.50 base. 

c о ыч ко EEEEx 


Millwork— 

O. P. $74.00 per 1000. R. W., $80.00 
per 1000 (delivered). 

Double hung box window frames, 
average, with trim, $5.00 and up. 
each. 

Doors, including trim (single panel, 
1% in. Oregon pine) $5.75 and up, 
each. 

Doors, including trim (five panel, 
134 in. Oregon pine) $5.50 each. 

Screen doors, $3.50 each. 

Patent screen windows, 20c a sq. ft. 
Cases for kitchen pantries seven ft. 
high, per lineal ft., $4.25 each. 
Dining room cases, $5.25 per lineal 

foot. 

Labor—Rough carpentry, warehouse 
heavy framing (average), $11.00 
per M. 

For smaller work, average, $22 to 
$30 per 1000. 


55 


Marble— (See Dealers) 


Painting— 
Two-coat work ....... 
Three-coat work ... .36с per yard 
Cold Water Painting ...... 8c per yard 
Whitewashing .................. 4c per yard 
Turpentine, 70c per gal, in cans and 
SOc per gal. in drums. 
Raw Linseed Oil—62c gal. in bbls. 
Boiled Linseed Oil—65c gal. in bbls. 
Medusa Portland Cement Paint, 20c 
per 1}. 
Carter or Dutch Boy White Lead in 
ОП (in steel kegs). 
Per Lb. 


1 ton lots, 100 lbs. net weight 1034c 
500 Ib. and less than 1 ton lots 11c 
Less than 500 Ib. lots.................. 11%с 
Datch Boy Dry Red Lead and 
Litharge (in steel kegs). 
1 ton lots, 100 1b. kegs, net wt. 1034c 
500 lb. and less than 1 ton lots 11с 
Less than 500 1b. lots.................. 11%с 
Red Lead in ӨЙ (in steel kegs) 
1 ton lots, 100 1b. keg s,net. wt. 1215c 
500 Ib. and less than 1 ton lots 12%c 
Less than 500 Ib. lots.. ee Loe 
Note—Accessibility and conditions 
cause wide variance of costs. 


...27с per yard 


Patent Chimneys— 

Ое e n $ .90 lineal foot 

.... 1.30 lineal foot 
. 1.50 lineal foot 

. 1.75 lineal foot 


10-inch... 
12-inch.. 


Plastering—Interior— 
Yard 
1 coat, brown mortar only, wood lath....$0.36 
о. к lime mortar Вага finish, wood am 
к... о о 


2 coats, hard wall plaster, wood lath... .50 
3 conta, metal lath ‘and “plaster 
Keene cement on metal lath . 


ТӨМ Жаа» eoo vede caede 
Ceilings with 34 hot roll channels metal 

lath пін егей 2-2 - 1.30 
Shingle partition 84 channel lath 1 aide .60 
Single partition % channel lath 2 aidea 

2 inches ВЕК: БО) 
4-inch double partition 34 channel lath 


OER л IEE 1.20 
4-inch double partition 34 channel lath 
2 aides plastered .................................. — PASS 
Plastering—Exterior— 
Yard 
2 coats cement finish, brick or соп- 
orete Wall orses ore о. $ .90 
2 coata Atlaa cement, brick or con- 
orete wall сыи енна EE 1.15 
3 соафа cement finish No. 18 gauge 
Кеете о с о 1.60 
3 соа{а Medusa ‘finish No. 18 gauge 
ТЕ В : 
Wood lath, $4.00 per "1000. 
2.5-lb. metal lath (dipped) .11 
2.6-lb. metal lath (galvanized) 220 
3.4-1Ь. metal lath (dipped)... 190 
3.4-lb. metal lath (galvanized .28 


34-inch hot roll channela, $72 
Finish plaster, $16.40 ton; in paper sacks, 
Dealer'a commission, $1.00 off above 
quotations. 
$13.86 (rebate 10c sack). 
Lime, f.o.b. warehouse, $2.25bbl.;cars, $2.16 
Lime, bulk (ton 2000 lba.), $16.00 ton. 
Wall Board 6 ply, $43.00 рег M. 
Hydrate Lime. $19.50 ton. 
Composition Stueeo—$1.35 to $1.75 per 


sq. yard (applied). 


Pinmbing— 
From $55.00 per fixture up, accord- 
ing to grade, quantity and runs. 


Roofing— 
“Standard” tar and gravel, $5.00 per 
square for 30 squares or over. 
Less than 30 squares, $5.25 per sq. 
Tile, $17.00 to $30.00 per square. 


Redwood Shingles, $11.00 per square 
in place. 

Cedar Shingles, $10 sq. in place. 

Recoat, with Gravel, $3.00 per sq. 


Sheet Metal— 
Windows—Metal, $1.80 a sq. foot. 
Fire doors (average), including 
hardware, $2.00 per sq. ft. 


Skyiights— 
Copper, $1.00 sq. ft. (not glazed). 
Galvanized fron, 25c sq. ft. (not 
glazed). 


Steel—Structural 
$78 ton (erected), this quotation is 
an average for comparatively 
small quantities. Light truss 
work higher. Plain beams and 
column work in large quantities 
$71 to $75 per ton cost of steel; 
average building, $77.00. 
Steel Reinforclng— 
$68.00 per ton, set, (average). 


Stone— 
Granlte, average, $6.50 cu. foot in 
place. 
Sandstone, average Blue, $3.50; 


Boise, $2.60 sq. ft. In place. 
Indiana Limestone, $2.60 per за, ft. 
in place, 


Store Fronts— 

Copper sash bars for store fronts, 
corner, center and around sides, 
will average 70c per lineal foot. 

Note—Consult with agents. 


Tile — Fioor, Wainscot, Etc. — (See 
Dealers). 


SAN FRANCISCO BUILDING TRADES WAGE SCALE FOR 1933 


Established by The Impartial Wage Board November 9, 1932. Effective on all work January 1, 1933, to remain in effect until June 30, 1933, and for so 
long thereajter os economic conditions remain substentially "unchanged. 


This scale ia based оп an eight-hour day and is to be considered as a minimum and employees of superior 
Skill and craft knowledge may be paid in excess of the amounts set forth herein. 


Journeyman 
CRAFT Mechanics 
Asbester Workers 
Bricklayera 


Bricklayera’ Hodcarriera 
Cabinet Workers (Outside) . 

Caisson Workers (Оше) Water Work 
Carpenters .......... 
Cement Finishers 
Cork Insulation Workers 
Electrical Workere 
Electrical Fixture Hang 
Elevator Constructors .......... 
Elevator Constructors’ Helpers 
Engineers, Portable and Hoisting . 
Glass Workers (All Classifications) . 
Hardwood Floormen 


Honsemovers ..... 
Housesmithe, Architectural Iron (Out- 
side) o о ар ел 1.20 
Housesmitha, Reinforred Concrete, or 
Rodmen 7.20 


*Established by Special Board 


Journeyman 
Mechanica 


CRAFT 
Iron Workers (Bridge and Structural).. 9.60 
lron Workers (Hoisting Engineera) ...... 10.00 


Laborers (6-day week) ... 5.00 
Lathera, Channel [ron 8.00 
Lathera, All Other 6.80 


Marble Settere .. 8.00 
Marble Settera’ 5.00 
Millwrighta 7.20* 


Mosaic and Terrazzo Workers (Outsi e) 1.20 


Mosaic and Terrazzo Helpers B 5.00 
Painters". ... 7.00 
Painters, Varnishers | "and Polishera 


COUT Side) ез а LM - 7.00 
Pile Drivers and Wharf Builders .......$ 8.00 
Pile Drivers Engineers . 9.00 
Plasterers ......... 8.80 


Plasterera’ Hodcarriers 6.00 
Plumbers... 8.00 
Reofers (Al 6.40 
Sheet Metal Workers 7.20 
Sprinkler Fitters . 9.00 
Steam Fitters ....... 8.00 


СКАЕТ Journeyman 
Mechanics 
Stair Builders .......... . 7.20* 
Stone Cuttera, Soft ‘and Granite . 6.80 
Stone Setters, Soft and Granite . 8.00 
Stone Derrickmen .. 7.20 
Tile Setters ........... 8.00 
Tile Setters’ Helper 5.00 
Tile. Cork and Rubber . 7.20 
Welders, Structural 
Buildings с 9.68 
Welders, All Others on Buildings 8.00 


Auto Truck Drivers—Less than 2,500 lbs. 5.50 
Auto Truck  Drivers—2,500 Ibs. to 


450. E 6.00 
Aute Truck  Drivers—4,500 lbs. to 
6,500 Iba. ....... 6.50 


Aute Trurk Drivers—6, 500 “Tbs. a and over 7.00 
General Teamsters, 1 Horse . 5.50 


General Teamaters, 2 Horses 6.00 
General Teamsterz, 4 Horses 6.50 
Plow Teamstera, 4 Horses ... 6.50 
Scraper Tenmsters, 2 Horses 6.00 
Scraper Teamstera, 4 Ногаев .... 6.00 


GENERAL WORKING CONDITIONS 


1. Eight hours shall constitute a day's work 
for all crafts, except as otherwise noted. 

2. Where less than eight hours are worked 
pro rata ratea for auch shorter period shall 
be paid. 

3. Plasterers’ Hodcarriers, Bricklayera’ Hod- 
carriers Roofers' Laborers and Engineers, 
Portable and Hoisting, shall atart 16 min- 
utea before other workmen, both at morn- 
ing and at noon, 

4. Five days, consisting of not more than 
eight houra a day, on Monday to Friday 
inclusive, shall constitute a week'a work. 

5. The wages set forth herein shall be con- 
Sidered as net wages. 

6. Except aa noted the above rates of pay ар- 
ae only to work performed at the job 
aite. 

7. Tranaportation costs in excess of twenty- 
five cents each way shall be paid by the 
contractor. 

8. Traveling time in excess of one and one- 
half hours each way shall be paid for at 
Straight time rates. 


9. Overtime shall be paid as follows: For 
the first four hours after the first eight 
houra, time and one-half. All time there- 
after shall be paid double time. Satur- 
daya (except Laborers), Sundays and Holi- 
days from 12 midnight of the preceding 
day, shall be paid double time. Irrespec- 
tive of atarting time, overtime for Cement 
Finishera shall not commence until after 
eight hours of work. 


10. On Saturday Laborers shall be paid 
straight time for an eight-hour day. 


11. Where two shifts are worked in апу 
twenty-four hours, ahift time shall be 
straight time. Where three shifts are 
worked, eight hours' pay shall be paid 
for seven houra on the second and third 
shifts. 

12. АП work, except as noted in paragraph 
13, shall be performed between the hours 
of 8 А. M. and 6 P. M. 


13. In emergencies, or where premises cannot 
be vacated until the close of business, 


men reporting for work shall work at 
straight time. Any work performed on 
such jobs after midnight shall be paid 
time and one-half up to four houra of 
overtime and double time thereafter (pro- 
vided, that if a new crew is employed on 
Saturdays, Sundays or Holidays which has 
not worked during the five preceding work- 
ing days, such crew shall be paid time 
and one-half. Мо job can be considered 
as an emergency job until it has been 
registered with the Industrial Association 
and a determination has been made that 
the job falls within the terms of this 
section). 

14. Recognized holidays to be: New Year's 
Day, Decoration Day, Fourth of July, 
Labor Day, Admiesion Day, Thanksgiving 
Day, Christmas Day. 

15. Men ordered to report for work, for 
whom no employment ia provided shall be 
entitled to two hours' pay. 

16. This award shall be effective in the City 
and County of San Francisco. 


NOTE: Provision of paragraph 13 appearing in brackets ( ) does not apply to Carpenters, Cabinet Workera (Outside), Hardwood Floormen, Mill- 


wrights, or Stair Builders. 


56 


The Architect and Engineer. February. 1933 


[|| 


ШЕ---- 


WASHINGTON STATE CHAPTER 


АП incumbent officers of the Washington State 
Chapter, А. I. А., were re-elected at the thirty- 
eighth annual session Saturday, January 14, at 
the New Washington Hotel, Seattle. "Confidence 
in Architecture" was the subject of the annual ad- 
dress by the Chapter president, J. Lister Holmes. 

Frederick V. Lockman, Seattle, was elected 
trustee for a three-year term as successor to Har- 
lan Thomas, whose term expired. 

Holding of a joint conference of the Western- 
Mountain and Sierra-Nevada Chapters was pro- 
posed in a letter received from Raymond J. Ash- 
ton of Salt Lake City, Utah, who is regional direc- 
tor. This conference is suggested as a substitute 
for the national convention, effective for this year. 
States in the Western-Mountain division are: 
Oregon, Washington, Idaho, Utah, Wyoming, 
Colorado and Montana. The Sierra-Nevada di- 
vision includes: California, Nevada, Arizona and 
New Mexico. The convention delegates chosen 
are: President and secretary ex-officio, Harold 
C. Whitehouse of Spokane, George W. Stoddard 
of Seattle, and Mr. McClelland. 

Standing committees and chairmen who report- 
ed activities were as follows: Civic design, Gove; 
education, Gould; exhibitions, Stoddard; ordin- 
ances, Lockman; competitions, William R. Grant; 
professional practice, McClelland; public informa- 
tion, Victor Jones; ways and means, Priteca. 

At the evening session a farcial skit depicting a 
session of the executive board was presented. It 
was written by Arthur L. Loveless. A disserta- 
tion on “Modern Trends in Architecture’ was 
offered by Arthur Hermann and Floyd Naramore. 
The negative was given by Lance Gowen, and the 
summary by Marcus Priteca. Forty-five members 
attended. 


THE ARCHITECT AND TECHNOCRACY 


“Is Technocracy Worthy of Our Considera- 
tion?" was the subject of a paper read by Regi- 
nald D. Johnson at the January meeting of the 
Southern California Chapter, A.I.A. Mr. Johnson 
summed up his findings by stating that technoc- 
racy probably cannot be successfully applied at 
the present time, although it demands some con- 
sideration. A general discussion on the subject 
followed. 

Sumner Spaulding, vice-president of the Chap- 
ter, presided and introduced the following guests: 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


Chapter and Club Meetings 


| 


И 


| 


Bernard Hoffman of Santa Barbara: Harold 
Crowell, former president of the Southern Cali- 
fornia Chapter, Associated General Contractors; 
and Professor Angel Guido of South America. 

The annual report of the president of the Chap- 
ter was read by Palmer Sabin. 


SAN FRANCISCO ARCHITECTURAL 
CLUB 


Members and guests have enjoyed the informal 
showing of an exhibition of the Rome prize draw- 
ings and also a collection of work done in other 
Ateliers and Colleges programmed by the Beaux 
Arts Institute of Design. 


* * * 


The depression did not interfere with the wel- 
coming in of the New Year, as the members took 
advantage of their club quarters in giving what 
may be considered an all time successful New 
Years Eve party. 


At the last regular business meeting. the follow- 
ing officers were elected to carry on for 1933: 
President, Donnell E. Jaekle; Vice-President, Ed- 
ward C. Counter; Secretary, H. Walter Ruppel; 


Treasurer, Sterling Carter; Directors, H. Johnson, 
А. В. Carpenter and E. К. McNinch. 


The members and officers are looking for- 
ward to a big year which has started with the 
same pep that characterized the successful year 
of 1932. 

Classes have been started in various subjects 
pertaining to architecture and engineering and 
these are held each evening of the week. It is the 
feeling of the committee on education that during 
the present lull in building activity, the draftsman 
should better himself in taking advantage of these 
classes. Information regarding this programme 
will gladly be sent on request.—H. W. R. 


LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTS ELECT 


The annual election of the Pacific Coast Chap- 
ter, American Society of Landscape Architects, re- 
sulted as follows: President, L. Deming Tilton; 
Vice-President, Frederick N. Evans; Treasurer, 
Russell L. McKown; Secretary, Miss Katherine 
Bashford; Executive Committee, John W. Gregg 
and George D. Hall. 


ENGINEERS’ DAY 

The Engineers Council of the University of 
California, announces the seventh annual Engi- 
neers’ Day at the University of California campus, 
Berkeley, on March 10. 

Engineers' Day has always been a great success, 
especially by virtue of its benefit to those inter- 
ested in the trend of modern engineering meth- 
ods. 

'Тһе program for the day will feature open 
house in the departments of electrical, civil, min- 
ing, mechanical and chemical engineering from 
1:00 to 6:00 P. M. Among the fifty or more 
demonstrations there will be: 

А Symposium on Welding; Golden Gate and 
Bay Bridge Models; T'elevision; Modulated Light 
Beam Communication; Kerosene, Hot Air, Diesel 
Engines; Tesla Coil High Frequency Demonstra- 
tion; Fatigue Tests; Airplane Construction; Pel- 
ton Water Wheel; Liquid Air. 


WASHINGTON STATE SOCIETY 


'The following officers were elected at the an- 
nual meeting of the Washington State Society of 
Architects held Thursday evening. January 12, at 
the Moore Hotel, Seattle, President John S. Hud- 
son, presiding: President, John S. Hudson of 
Seattle; First Vice-President, Julius A. Zittle of 
Spokane; Second Vice-President, Stanley A. 
Smith of Pullman; Third Vice-President, Robert 
Max Thorne of Renton; Fourth Vice-President, 
К. C. Stanley of Seattle; Secretary, Isaac L. 
Wright of Seattle; Treasurer, Harry G. Hammond 
of Seattle; Trustee, W. C. Jackson of Seattle. 


PORTLAND ARCHITECT HONORED 

O. R. Bean, member of the architectural firm of 
Lawrence, Holford, Allyn and Bean of Portland, 
Oregon, has recently been elected City Commis- 
sioner against a large field of candidates. Al- 
though his first experience in politics, his decisive 
victory at the polls is considered to be a public 
recognition of his contributions to public service 
in his work on the Housing Code, Board of Ap- 
peal, and on committees of the Oregon Building 
Congress and the City Club. 


PIER ALTERATIONS 

Frank С. White, engineer for the State Har- 
bor Commission, reports that plans are being com- 
pleted for a $100,000 extension to Pier 35 at the 
foot of Bay Street, San Francisco. The addition 
will be of timber and will be built on a concrete 
sub-structure. A new elevator is included in the 
work. 


55 


ART COMMISSION HAS BUSY YEAR 


During the year 1932 the Los Angeles Munic- 
ipal Art Commission approved plans for eighty- 
two buildings and structures, sculptures and paint- 
ings estimated to cost $3,032,905. In addition, the 
commission gave approval as to the scheme gen- 
erally and the "set back" plan for the proposed 
union passenger station in the Los Angeles Plaza 
district. i 

Among the important public works projects 
given preliminary approval were the Figueroa 
Street viaduct over Los Angeles river, Southern 
Pacific tracks and San Fernando Road, estimated 
to cost $900,000; and Figueroa Street tunnel No. 
4, between Solano Avenue and Bishop Road, to 
cost $500,000. Final approval was given to the 
$200,000 Silver Lake Boulevard-Temple Street 
grade separation, and the $225,000 Silver Lake- 
Sunset Boulevard grade separation structures. 

Public building projects approved included the 
$275,000 San Fernando Valley city hall at Van 
Nuys. | 

The commission definitely went on record, urg- 
ing that in the designing of municipal buildings, 
attention should be given to fitting the architecture 
to the particular locality in which the building was 
to be erected and that a design should not be 
selected only because it was a good example of 
architecture. C. M. Winslow, architect-commis- 
sioner, warned that the modern type might be a 
fad and only temporary. 

Other building plans approved included the 
$450,000 planetarium in Griffith Park and the 
$110,000 municipal power station at 6776 Haw- 
thorne Avenue. n 

Eleven mural paintings were approved for the 
rotunda of the Central Public Library. These are: 
"Fire," “Water,” "Art," "Industry," "Educa- 
tion," "Commerce," "Founding of Los Angeles," 
"Discovery of California," "Arrival California," 
"Arrival of the White Woman," "Gold in the 
Earth," and "Gold in the Air.". Dean Cornwell 
is the artist. The estimated cost of the paintings 
is $45,555. The commission viewed these at the 
studio of the artist during the progress of the 
work. 


$350,000 RESIDENCE 

Reginald D. Johnson, 707 Architects Building. 
Los Angeles, is preparing working plans for a 
two-story and basement residence to be erected 
on East Cabrille Boulevard. Santa Barbara, for 
Mrs. Wm. A. Clark. There will be approximately 
thirty rooms. The house will be U-shaped, ex- 
treme dimensions 150x175 feet; reinforced con- 
crete construction, masonry veneer exterior, wood 


roof framing, and shingle tile roof. The cost is 
estimated at $350,000. 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


Index to Advertising Announcements 


For Classified List of Advertisers see Pages 77, 78, 79 


A 
В oe NT 71 
Anderson and Қапото .................................... 75 
вех heu. (Об c Eiaa 74 
еМ Сс САН... 2 
B 
[e реест о 75 
аттес Cos ЕЧ. ......................-......--.... 74 
Brown Hardwood Со., С.Н... 67 
C 
Cabot Inc., Samuel . а» = 
California DUE Cloth о. Tae = 67 
Clark & Sons, М.“ и. -7 
Clervi Marble & Mosaic СИ КОШМО ОУ сл... 72 
Chaton Construction Со 69 
Tore O Ио 72 
Cutlera Mal CRUE 222222220034 65 
D 
Ша ree Surgery Co, Иа), == Back Cover 
ео осе Products Co. г 75 
ОЕ ушп Properties —.—-....-......------—.-.---------- 70 
Әке Chy Mig. Co, W. 9 70 
роте Construction Со. 73 
F 
Pime о ое (ОО. уу... 73 
Förderer Cornice Works ...............................- 7? 
Eenes Steel ЗА... 75 
G 


Comett Young & Company 2 72 
General Roofing Co. 


(ЧЧ McBean ле... 5 
Golden Gate Atlas Materials Со. .................. 71 
Graces og cliente DR 76 
Grinnell Company of the Pacific -------------------- 71 
ОШ Оу Оогпгпусе Works e nes 70 
(шп, Е Company s-sies 67 
H 
Шола 19, ammullpe eee eee 62 
Haws Sanitary Drinking Faucet Co. ................ 65 
Шішіңіе (Со), Ма МУ. ваа go 
[Ышш S Та. 75 


Jemen, Gu TRE ce 


Jiclunsom Qe, S7 dE 222. 76 

Jenaan сезсе Со 3 

Тай, КС (О 68 
К 

Kaplan, Jo О Мз... 66 

Keganee Boiler @огр. RR 70 

НЕСЕ СОР 220 22-.-. 69 


Пәлен Шаа с 
Leather Mat Mfg. Co. ..... 
Lindgren €? Swincrton, Inc. .. 


M 

Ма [йола КУ 

Мала (6500 
McClintic- Marshall Con PUE RE 
Ме Меат Brick Фо БЕРЕТ 
Mercury гезен о И 
Mueller Со. ............ indc A ы... 
Mullen Manufacturing g Co, Ligeia. IRAM 
Musto Sons Keenan Co a Joseph m асына 


N 
National Lead Company ИИ 
О 
Oan Shore [топ ОСА 
Otis Elevator Company .......................... 
P 
Pacific Coast Electrical Bureau 22.22. 
Pacific Coast Gas Association 2.2.2.2... 


Расе Coast ссе Corny 
Рае hound ОИНИ 
Расїйс Manufacturing (Ol eese 
Pacifc Metals Co., Ltd. 
Pacifc Portland Cement Со. E 
Palace НЕТ аа ы 


Рата пе отра 

Parker Фо, ше. КОЕ З EM 

Picard, Тас, МУН ce 
Q 

Ouand Эол e RM 
R 

Republic Steel Gor 

Rex, John В 
5 

Sandovalecd ess о и 

Sisalkraft; (оа ee NE 

Sloane; We @ ШЕ жс» rM 

Smith Lumber Co. of Oakland ................ 

Stanley а аа 

Steclforme Соштгтасипо Со. ш 
т 

Tormey Company, Dhe „= а 
У 

Мачо ап СЕИСО к e 

ӨПКЕН Обо л к к 
ху 

Western ОПЕ : 

Wood! Lumber Cor ER. S 


*Appears alternate months 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


^ 
ә 


2nd Cover 


PERSONAL 


ВлеРн D. ConNELL of Cook, Hall and Cornell, 
landscape architects of Los Angeles, met with an 
unusual accident recently when a eucalyptus tree 
fell on the machine in which he was riding. The 
accident occurred at the height of a severe wind 
storm. Mr Cornell was fortunate in escaping seri- 
ous injury although he was prevented from at- 
tending to his professional duties for several days. 

Lewis P. Новавт, architect, has been re-elected 
president of the San Francisco Art Commission. 

Harry H. James, member of the Washington 
state examining board, has moved his office from 
the Lowman Building to 1104 Third Avenue, Se- 
attle. 

Scorr Quintin of Los Angeles county, has 
been elected president of the San Gabriel Cham- 
ber of Commerce for 1933. 

Јонм P. KnEMPEL and Warren E. Erxes have 
moved their offices from the Transamerica Build- 
ing to suite 1206-07 Rives-Strong Building, Ninth 
and Main Streets, Los Angeles. 

Етоур A. NARAMORE, school architect of Seat- 
tle, who sojourned in Europe all summer, has re- 
turned home and resumed practice. 


С. M. FirzHugH, architect, has been elected 
president of the Phoenix, Arizona, Building Con- 
gress. 


ENGLISH RESIDENCE 


Harold С. Stoner, 810 Ulloa Street, San Fran- 
cisco, is preparing preliminary drawings for a two- 
story and basement English residence in Hills- 
borough Park, San Mateo County, for Dr. W. H. 
Murphy, 205 Third Avenue, San Mateo. The 
house wil! have nine rooms, three baths, oil burn- 
ing steam heat, hardwood floors, etc. 


ADDITION TO MAUSOLEUM 


H. A. Minton, architect, 525 Market Street, 
San Francisco, and L. H. Nishkian, engineer, are 
completing drawings for a north wing addition of 
reinforced concrete to the Holy Cross mausoleum 
in San Mateo County. Interior will be entirely 
of marble. The estimated cost is $100,000. 


MOVING A 300 YEAR OLD ROOM 


A 300 year old room and its equally antique 
furnishings which were transported from Switz- 
erland to the Toledo Museum of Art a few years 
ago, again were moved to a new setting when the 
Museum recently tripled its size by the addition 
of two huge wings which were opened to the pub- 
lic January 10. 


60 


The room originally formed part of the "Villa 
Solitude" on the shore of the lake at Zurich. 
When the villa was demolished a few years ago, 
the one room and its contents were purchased by 
Mrs. Nettie Poe Ketcham to be presented to the 
Toledo institution. The walnut panelling of the 
walls and ceiling was carefully taken apart, the 
quaint bottle windows removed, the great tile stove 
dismantled and, together with a table even older 
than the room, chairs, a cradle, a book case with 
several hundred volumes and various household 
utensils shipped to the Toledo Museum of Art. 
There the room was re-assembled exactly as it 
stood for three hundred years in the Old World. 

Stepping into it from the galleries of the Toledo 
Museum, the visitor goes in one stride from mod- 
ernity to antiquity, the room being in a remark- 
able state of preservation and its furnishings ar- 
ranged exactly as when the occupants of the 
“Villa Solitude” lived in it. Lighting effects in- 
stalled behind the mellow-hued translucent win- 
dow panes lend the illusion of bright Swiss sun- 
shine flooding the low ceilinged nooks and glint- 
ing from the brightly colored tiles of the orna- 
mental stove which is one of the room's outstand- 
ing features. 

Interior alterations of the Toledo Museum, new 
arrangements of its gallery plan and the additional 
space made available by the $2,000,000 wings now 
completed, made it necessary to once again take 
apart, piece by piece, what was built and as- 
sembled so carefully and solidly in Switzerland 
three hundred years ago, and to move the ensemble 
to a location in the Museum's new west wing, 
where there also are numerous huge galleries de- 
voted to the institution's great collection of 
paintings. 

Moving of the Swiss Room was but one of 
hundreds of intricate changes made in the inter- 
ior of what stands today as one of the finest, most 
modern, and most beautiful art museums in the 
country. Exhibition galleries now have more than 
two acres of floor space; the museum School of 
Design, in which tuition is free, has class and 
assembly rooms unexcelled in comfort and effi- 
ciency; the east wing of the edifice houses a 1,500 
seat concert hall—designated as the Peristyle— 
which is absolutely unique in America; gallery 
space has been provided for unlimited expansion 
of the Museum's already vast collections, includ- 
ing one of the most comprehensive arrays of an- 
cient glass in the world; the lawns and terraces 
of the Museum grounds have been landscaped on 
an entirely new scale to give the building's exter- 
ior an appearance fitting the classic beauty of its 
architecture and appointments, and other steps 
have been taken to unify in complete harmony the 
new additions and the original structure. 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


RESULT OF SPRING GARDEN SHOW 
COMPETITION 

Harold G. Fowler, landscape architect and spe- 
cial student with the Division of Landscape De- 
sign at the University of California, Berkeley, was 
awarded first prize for his design in the Spring 
Garden Show competition in Oakland, the pro- 
gram for which was published in full last month. 

The competition was open to professionally 
trained landscape architects and students of pro- 
fessional courses in California. 

The Jury of Awards consisted of the following 
men: 

Mr. Frederick N. Evans, M. L. A. of Harvard 
University, formerly head of the Department of 
Landscape Architecture at the University of Ш- 
inois, Fellow of the A. S. L. A., vice president of 
the Pacific Coast Chapter and for a number of 
years Landscape Architect for the city of Sac- 
ramento. 

Mr. L. Deming Tilton, Fellow of the A. S. 
L. А. and president of the Pacific Coast Chapter, 
now engaged in the practice of landscape archi- 
tecture and county planning in Santa Barbara and 
San Diego Counties. 

Mr. Thomas Vint, member of the A. S. L. А., 
graduate of the Division of Landscape Design, 
U. of C., Chief Landscape Engineer of the Na- 
tional Park Service with headquarters in San 
Francisco. 

Mr. Howard Gilkey, member of the A. S. L. A., 
graduate of the Division of Landscape Design, 
Ц. of C., Landscape Architect of Oakland and 
professional manager of the Spring Garden Show, 
Inc. 

Mr. George Budgen, graduate of the Division 
of Landscape Architecture, Penn State College 
and at present engaged in the nursery business 
in Berkeley. 

The competition was participated in by profes- 
sional landscape architects located over the State 
and by students in the Division of Landscape 
Design, University of California, Berkeley. 

The jury announced the following unanimous 
awards: 

First award, $150—Harold С. Fowler, Land- 
scape Architect, San Francisco, Calif. Special 
student with the Division of Landscape Design, 
U. of C., Berkeley. 

Second award, $75—Arthur Cobbledick, Land- 
scape Architect, Oakland, Calif. Graduate of the 
Division of Landscape Design, U. of C. 

Third award, $50 — Vernon M. Dean, senior 
student, Division of Landscape Design, U. of C., 
Berkeley. 

First honorable mention — Wm. Sharon Farr, 
Landscape Architect, San Francisco and Oakland, 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


graduate of the Division of Landscape Design. 
U. of C., Berkeley. 

Second honorable mention—Miss Geraldine P. 
Knight and Mrs. Willa Cloys Carmack, collabo- 
rating, landscape architects of San Francisco and 
the Peninsula, both graduates of the Division of 
Landscape Design, Ц. of C. 


TWO NOTABLE STRUCTURES 

Dedication of the new Law Building of the 
University of Washington, Seattle, January 6, 
marked a signal triumph for A. H. Albertson and 
associates, Joseph W. Wilson and Paul Richard- 
son. The quarter-million dollar example of Tudor 
Gothic architecture is considered one of the best 
equipped and most modernly appointed law school 
edifices in the West. 

Another building in the Northwest that is re- 
ceiving much favorable comment is the new Ц. S. 
Marine Hospital, Seattle, designed by Messrs. 
Charles H. Bebb and Carl F. Gould. 


PROVISIONAL CERTIFICATES 


At a recent meeting of the State Board of 
Architectural Examiners, Southern District, the 
following candidates were granted provisional cer- 
tificates to practice architecture in the State of 
California: 

Herman Adolph Spackler, 5419 Poplar Boule- 
vard, Los Angeles; Benjamin Louis Wiseman, 628 
Union Oil Building, Los Angeles; Harold Newton 
Abrams, 3503 Park Boulevard, San Diego; Ed- 
ward Warren Hoak, 1721 Bushnell Avenue, 
South Pasadena; Christian Eberle Choate, 2600 
South Hoover, Los Angeles. 


OAKLAND HOUSING NEEDS 


А program of building which will provide 5,000 
new single family homes in the next three years 
is justified by the analysis of data compiled by the 
Oakland Real Estate Board, according to a re- 
port by James H. L'Hommedieu, president. 

This building program would release more than 
$10,000,000, L'Hommedieu said, would put the 
building trades to work again and would provide 
adequate housing for the 5,000 families who are 
now occupying apartments jointly with other fam- 
ilies. 

“With our population increasing by more than 
3 per cent a year, our current building activity re- 
duced to a negligible volume, and with the San 
Francisco Bay Bridge project promising 60,000 
newcomers within a year after its completion, it is 
evident that a strong building program should be 
started immediately," L'Hommedieu said. 


61 


62 


| ТНЕ 
FOUNDATION 
PROBLEMS 


in 
San Francisco 


Are described by a committee 
of distinguished engineers in a 
valuable book just published 

e by the ә 


SAN FRANCISCO SECTION 
AMERICAN SOCIETY 
OF CIVIL ENGINEERS 


? ? 
€ No architect or engineer 
should be without this com- 
plete and dependable analysis 
of the soil conditions in the 
San Francisco Bay Region. Sev- 
eral years were consumed in 
compiling data and preparing 


this report. 


€ Copies of the book may be 
procured from the secretary- 
treasurer: 


HAROLD B. 
381 BUSH STREET 


HAMMILL 
SAN FRANCISCO 


e The price 15 


$6.00 


ENCOURAGE MODERNIZATION 


Revolutionary changes in architectural sales 
practice, with emphasis on better design, and 
modernization planning, will bring about revival 
of the building industry, Albert O. Larson of 
Minneapolis, secretary of the Minnesota Chapter 
of the American Institute of Architects, declares 
in a summary of the needs of architecture in 1933. 
He condemns the selling procedure now in use 
and asserts that "we, the architects, contractors 
and manufacturers have utterly failed in the 
emergency." 

Mr. Larson maintains that co-ordinated effort, 
both by word of mouth and by printed advertise- 
ment, with the sole idea of creating the desire to 
build in the minds of the public would result in 
billions of dollars in building operations, as com- 
pared with what he describes as the present 
apathy. He points out that there are still many 
tasks waiting for the architect and the building 
industry, foremost among which he places the 
need of economically constructed houses for the 
workers whose salary is under $2,000 a year. 

"Let us look at the picture," he says, referring 
to the sales machinery generally used by the build- 
ing trades. "The architects sit and wait for the 
prospective builder; the contractors await the 
architects' call; all at a terrific loss. 

"But that is only a tiny part of the panorama 
of lost motion. Thousands of building material 
salesmen calling as of old upon only the archi- 
tects and contractors; millions of dollars spent in 
advertising aimed only at architect and contractor 
readers. And even the small amount of building 
material advertising in the popular magazines and 
newspapers still is written on the premise that 
building operations are going on unabated. 

“What is the sum total? Millions of hours of 
time and millions of dollars spent now in exactly 
the same way as in 1928 and 1929; but only min- 
utes and pennies spent on the idea of selling the 
potential spender what to build, when to build 
and—most important of all—the creation in his 
mind of the desire to build, whether it be a new 
structure or a few hour bit of remodeling." 

Mr. Larson advises the building industry to 
turn from the "glory of the skyscrapers of 1928 
and 1929" to a consideration of the smaller, but 
more timely, construction needs of the present as 
a means of giving work to the hundreds of thou- 
sands of jobless building mechanics. 

“The hopes of private building operations in 
the form of large projects must for economic rea- 
sons be put aside for an indefinite time," he as- 
serts, "In our mad expansion and in the tremen- 
dous building program, there has been little at- 
tempt to solve the housing problem for the great 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


masses of our population. Invention, science and 
all other progress has done nothing for the home 
comfort of millions of families except to give half 
our population the worn-out, cast-off living quar- 
ters of the other half. 

“Our social progress has finally demanded that 
we give the poor man's child school accommoda- 
tions comparable with those of the wealthier 
neighbor; but beyond that he has profited little. 
Slum clearance has been theorized over for forty 
years but it remains for the future to see it oper- 
ative. But architects and manufacturers have al- 
ready demonstrated that such housing is possible 
in a variety of forms. European cities are now in 
a sound, economic manner solving the housing 
problem. 

“There are tens of thousands of other types of 
obsolete and depreciated structures which should 
be rehabilitated and modernized. Year by year we 
see both commercial and residential property 
shrink in value because of depreciation and obso- 
lescence. With our face toward the sun we saw 
the great new skyscrapers towering toward the 
clouds as the only construction work worth while. 
Even today the building industry advertisements 
show mute evidence of the glory that was ours 
in 1929. But, shrinking values can be held sta- 
tionary or increased by competent, intelligent 
modernization. 

“Modern invention has so complicated man’s 
mode of living and doing business that obsoles- 
cence moves on faster than ever in every type of 
building. Man has always been a builder and all 
our industry's forces must be co-ordinated to dem- 
onstrate again to the public that a better home, a 
better store or a better office is just as important 
as a new automobile or boat; and that building 
construction properly designed, well built and of 
good materials, is a good investment.” 


PRESERVE GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS 


The records of our Nation, rich in treasured 
volumes and historical documents, will be scien- 
tifically preserved and safely stored in the Na- 
tional Archives Building, now under construction 
at Washington, D. C. 

The science of air conditioning is to play a par- 
amount role in the preservation and safe keeping 
of these valuable records and papers. 

A complete system of air conditioning and ven- 
tilation for the entire building, including adminis- 
tration offices, stack spaces and exhibition galler- 
ies, is to be installed. 

The monumental structure, designed by John 
Russell Pope of New York, will be constructed of 
limestone. It will be situated between Sixth and 
Seventh Streets, facing Constitution Avenue with 
entrances also on Pennsylvania Avenue. The 


The Architect and Engincer, February, 1933 


1 wan 
to build a 


house 


Some people are saying that... today... with 


thousands of houses to be had for a song! 


ШЕ шап who builds a house right now could 
buy an already completed structure for a lot 
less money. 

Why. then, does he build? Because none of the 
existing " bargains" has all the things he wants his 
home to have. Isn't that true? 

The electrical industry has been thinking a lot 
about that situation. How can it, along with archi- 
tects and contractors and building supply factors 
cooperate in educating more people— just as soon 
as possible—to want the new type of home? 

Maybe you've had the same question in mind. 
And maybe you have an answer. The Pacific Coast 
Electrical Bureau is interested in discussing such 
ideas with any individual or any group of building 
people. Visit, or write to, our nearest office. 

Pacific Coast Electrical Bureau. А non-profit 
organization sup- 
ported by all branch- 
es of the industry as 
an advisory bureau 


Would this help? 


Suppose in every wiring 
specification from now on. 
you provided for the most 
modern method of cook- 
ing— by electric range. 
Your client would be 
saved rewiring expense. 


to serve users of elec- 
tricity. 447 Sutter St., 
San Francisco, M-15 
Edison Building, Los 
Angeles, 848 Roose- 
velt St., Fresno. 


His home would be 
тоге salable and worth 
more. 

And you would help in 
promoting the type of 
home that will make 
present structures old- 
fashioned. 

Tt would help your 
client. yourself, and the 
entire building industry. 


63 


BUILD 
WELE- 


PROPERLY designed and well built 
building is a credit to any city and 
3 worth while investment for its owner. 


Such structures are the STAND- 
ARD Оп, Воилиме, MATSON 
Вопрімс, Four-Firry Sur- 
TER STREET, STOCK EXCHANGE, 
S. Е, ВАЗЕ BALL Park, MILLS 


Tower, Opera House and 
VETERANS MMEMoRIAL and 
other notable structures — all 


built or supervised by — 


Lindqren & Swinerton, Inc. 


Standard Oil Building 
San Francisco 


Stanley 
Ball Bearing Hinges 


FOR smooth, trouble-free operation of 
doors for the life of the building. 


You will find our ‘Architect's Man- 
val of Stanley Hardware” very 
useful in making up hardware 
specifications. Send for a copy. 


THE STANLEY WORKS 
New Britain, Conn. 


SAN FRANCISCO 
576 Monadnock Bldg,| 


LOS ANGELES 
1202 Washington Bldg. 


SEATTLE 
501 Maynard Bldg. 


64 


building which is to be five stories high, will con- 
tain twenty-one tiers of stacks, each approxi- 
mately seven feet six inches high, on which the 
documents and papers will be stored and cata- 
logued for reference. The basement will contain 
cleaning, repairing and bindery spaces, photo- 
graphic rooms, storage and mechanical equip- 
ment. The present plans provide for a building 
occupying a floor area of 459,000 square feet, and 
containing approximately 4,000,000 cubic feet of 
conditioned space. Provision has been made to 
allow for expansion to 10,000,000 cubic feet as 
conditions and legislation may provide. 

In no better place can a Nation's history and 
progress, its diplomatic relations, its business 
transactions, be recorded and made available for 
ready reference and use than in a National Ar- 
chives Building, in which the numberless treas- 
ured volumes and valuable papers of its various 
departmental branches may be assembled. 

The new Archives Building is to house papers 
which heretofore have been stored in any avail- 
able quarters, such as rented structures, cellars 
and attic spaces, in many cases at considerable 
expense, exposing them to damage by the ele- 
ments and loss by fire. Such valuable papers as 
Indian treaties, land grants, titles, committee re- 
ports, important letters and international docu- 
ments, many of which had their origin before 1860, 
wil be transferred to the Archives Building. 
Housed under one roof, they will be accessible 
for administrative and historical purposes. No 
longer will it be necessary for busy executives, 
secretaries, students of law, history and finance 
to search for papers in widely separated quarters. 

Truly an efficiency measure as well as a monu- 
mental edifice, it represents the cumulative efforts 
of a movement long fostered and proposed by a 
number of far sighted individuals. As a matter 
of fact, a program for a national archives build- 
ing was submitted for legislation as early as 1912. 

Even when the building was first proposed, the 
essential elements of preservation were considered 
—those elements which now constitute the funda- 
mentals of a modern air conditioning system. In 
a report of October, 1912, appearing in the Amer- 
ican Historical Review, we find the following cita- 
tion: "The ventilation and heating of the stacks 
must be such as to insure an abundance of air 
and an even temperature, avoiding dampness on 
the one hand and too dry an atmosphere on the 
other. These considerations are most important 
for the preservation of the archives and cannot 
be neglected without disastrous results." 

Today, the science of air conditioning which 
has been applied successfully and profitably to 
numerous industrial processes and human comfort 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


applications, finds a new role in protecting na- 
tional records from damage by the elements to in- 
sure their safe keeping for generations and cen- 
turies. 

А personnel of over 1800 will enjoy the com- 
forts and health of an invigorating atmosphere 
provided by a modern system of refrigeration and 
air conditioning, for all spaces are to be made 
comfortably cool in summer as well as healthfully 
tempered and humidified in winter. The musty 
odors, common in libraries where books have been 
stored for years, will not be present in this new 
structure. The system has been designed to purify 
the air and remove all traces of dust and disagree- 
able odors. 

Seven complete air conditioning systems, all 
under automatic control, will supply 315,000 cubic 
feet of conditioned air every minute to the various 
sections of the building. The air will be filtered, 
washed and purified in each of these mammoth 
conditioning chambers, and distributed by fans 
and ducts to every portion of the structure. The 
system has been designed to automatically main- 
tain an even temperature and constant humidity 
the year round, regardless of changing outdoor 
conditions, for the primary purpose of preserving 
the papers. As a part of the system, equipment 
is to be installed which will remove all traces of 
sulphur dioxide gas from the air delivered to the 
various spaces. Although the fact is not usually 
considered in general air conditioning work, such 
as in theaters, department stores and other human 
comfort applications, scientific investigation has 
found that the smoke laden air and gases in our 
cities, produce an appreciable percentage of sul- 
phur dioxide gas in the atmosphere. Although the 
percentage of this gas in the atmosphere is rela- 
tively small, it has been found to have a decided 
deteriorating effect upon papers and books, caus- 
ing them to turn yellow and crumble with age. 


NINE DOLLARS FOR MASONS 

Ап agreement among themselves to pay their 
bricklayers $9 a day has been signed by the lead- 
ing bricklaying contractors of Oakland and the 
East Bay. This is the scale fixed by the Impar- 
tial Wage Board last October and adopted by the 
East Bay Industrial Association. 

The bricklayers union has been trying to 
maintain a wage of $11 a day. 


PENINSULAR NEW RESIDENCES 
New work completed in the office of Willis 
Polk & Company. 277 Pine Street, San Francisco, 
includes a Colonial residence in Hillsborough for 
H. L. Clary and an English home in San Mateo 
for C. C. Young, the latter house to cost in the 
neighborhood of $30,000. 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1935 


HAWS 


Model 5C Drinking Fountain in frown was in- 
stalled in the offices of Dean Witter & Company, 


Porter Building, Portland, Oregon, of which 
Kent & Hass were the architects. 


Model No. 5C 


HAWS SANITARY DRINKING FOUNTAIN CO. 


1808 Harmon Street, Berkeley 


MODERNIZING 


By providing a CUTLER MAIL CHUTE. 
A building however old fashioned in 
other respects can be made as modern 
in mail service as the latest skyscraper. 
What the tenant wants is not so much 
something to look at as something to 
use in the transaction of his business. 


Full information, details, specifications 
and estimates on request. 


PRICE BUILDING SPECIALTIES, 


San Francisco, California 


CONTINENTAL BUILDING SPECIALTIES, Inc. 
Los Angeles, California 


О. Е. FRYER & COMPANY, C. W. BOOST, 
Seattle, Washington Portland, Oregon 


FRYER-FORD COMPANY, 
Spokane, Washington 


CUTLER MAIL CHUTE CO. 


General Offices and Factory 


ROCHESTER, М.У. 


MONEL METAL 


[High Nickel Alloy] 


| is the accepted material for soda foun- 
tains and lunch-room equipment, just as 
it is the universal metal for food service 
equipment in leading hotels and restau- 
rants throughout the eountry. 


e 
CORROSIRON 


[404 Resisting Iron] 


is the aecepted material for draining 
waste lines. CORROSIRON meets all 
State and Municipal specifications for 
drain lines from school laboratories and 
chemistry rooms. 


Pacific Foundry Company Ltd. 
Pacific Metals Company Ltd. 


470 East Third St. 
LOS ANGELES 


3100 Nineteenth St. 
SAN FRANCISCO 


551 Fifth Ave. 
NEW YORK 


HEATING * COOKING 
WATER HEATING * REFRIGERATION 


Quick Clean Economical 


the modern fuel 


Satisfies owners... 
... pleases tenants 


IF YOU HAVE 


Worked out the solution of an 


ARCHITECTURAL PROBLEM 


And want patent protection for the same, write 
me for an opinion on the probable patentability 
and an estimate of the cost. 


J. KAPLAN 


Washington Loan & Trust Bldg. 
Washington, D. C. 
Registered Patent. Attorney 


66 


REPORT ON MECHANICS 
LIEN ACT 


A REPORT has been submitted to the Sec- 
VEN) retary of Commerce by the Standard State 
Mechanics Lien Act Committee of the U. S. Bur- 
eau of Standards on the standard act, drafted 
after eight years of study. According to the re- 
port of the committee it has “endeavored to safe- 
guard the interest of the owner at every step, and 
at the same time to accord to the contractor, the 
subcontractor, the materialman and the laborer a 
facility for filing and proving their liens so as to 
insure security to them upon the real property for 
which their work or materials were furnished or 
upon a bond substituted for it.” 

In a statement given out in making the report 
public the Department of Commerce says: 

“The Uniform Act provides for an informal 
procedure, which conforms largely to modern 
business practice in the construction industries, in 
order that the parties involved may adjust any 
difficulties that may arise without resort to the 
public record. A lien action is not a friendly act 
and its avoidance is advantageous to all parties 
through the saving of expense, delay and annoy- 
ance, the preserving of business reputation, and 
keeping titles clear of lien clouds.” 

The statement calls attention to the following 
paragraphs in the committee's report: 

“The drafting of legislation of this character 
is always complex because of the numerous and 
diverse interests which it affects. Throughout the 
long course of such legislation in the United 
States, many types of laws have been enacted,some 
discarded, and all frequently attended, most of 
the amendments being the result of efforts by a 
particular group or groups seeking more thorough 
protection. This has inevitably resulted in acts 
under which undue advantage accrues to one or 
more groups at the expense of others. 

“This committee, which included representa- 
tives of virtually all of the interested groups, with 
an opportunity not previously afforded to any 
other body, has attempted to arrive at that equit- 
able point at which the interests of all groups, as 
nearly as is possible, may be equally subserved. 
The committee considers the agreement that has 
been reached upon this draft Act to constitute a 
distinct forward step in the field of this type of 
legislation. 

In expressing his appreciation of the public 
service rendered by the committee the Secretary 
of Commerce declares, "I believe that you have 
made a real contribution to the movement for 
greater uniformity in state laws affecting the con- 
duct of business, a movement which has been 
gaining pace over a period of more than 40 years, 
and particularly during the last decade. Under 
our present economic system where commercial 


The Architect and Engineer. February, 1933 


transactions, even those in the field of construc- 
tion, are carried on over great distances, haphaz- 
ard variations in legislation should be minimized, 
and the advantages of uniform legislation more 
generally appreciated. Business should not be 
hampered by having to operate under many dif- 
fering state laws, where there is no substantial 
foundation, either in local conditions or public at- 
titude, for the diversity. A growing recognition of 
this fact is undoubtedly back of much of the 
widespread interest in the Uniform Mechanics’ 
Lien Act.” 

The draft of the proposed Act has the approval 
of the National Conference of Commissioners on 
Uniform State Laws and the National Bar Asso- 
ciation. 


General Principles of Act 


The committee which drafted the measure out- 
lines the general principles of the proposed Act 
as follows: 

1. A lien on real estate is provided, as gener- 
ally in prevailing statutes, for a contractor, a sub- 
contractor (including a subcontractor of a subcon- 
tractor but not one more remote), a materialman, 
a laborer; and in addition such right is accorded 
an architect, landscape architect, and engineer, for 
preparing plans for a building actually constructed 
or for supervision. 

2. In accordance with the weight of statutory 
authority in this country, the lien dates [rom the 
visible commencement of building operations. 

3. The liability of the owner, provided he 
complies with the act, is limited to the contract 
price. 

4. Lien claimants whose claims are derived 
through the contractor, i. e., subcontractors and 
materialmen, may, by an informal notice provided 
for by the act (without a resort to the formal rec- 
ord claim of lien), require the owner to retain 
funds in his hands for satisfaction of claims. 1f, 
however, the debt is not paid pursuant to said 
notice, a formal claim of lien must be filed for 
public record according to usages now prevailing. 
Laborers are accorded similar protection without 
the necessity of such an informal notice, but, if 
not paid, must file the formal claim of lien to sub- 
ject the real property to liability. 

5. Priority is given (after a first priority to 
laborers) to those who give the owner their in- 
formal notices while still rendering services but 
within 30 days of beginning to do so, but those 
not giving such notices are not deprived of thc 
right thereafter to file for record a formal claim 
of lien. 

6. Though he is not required to do so, the 
owner may, as the work progresses. make pay- 
ments to laborers at any time without requirement 
of the aforesaid informal notice; to claimants who 
give that notice within the limited time, provided 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


1044-1058 Forty-seventh Avenue 
OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 
Telephone: FR uitvale 8305-8306 


с / Product of Хх D) 
CALIFORNIA SHADE CLOTH CO. 


1710 San Bruno Avenue, San Francisco 
Manufacturers of 


QUALITY HAND MADE SHADE CLOTH 
IN ALL GRADES 


Wholesale Distributors 


SLOANE-BLABON LINOLEUM 


Pomp Governors Oil Heaters 


Safety Pump Governors 

Automatic Gas Regulat- 
ing Valves 

Gas Burners 

Gas Burning Equipment 

Vacuum Pump Governors 

Vacunm Regulating 
Valves 


Relief Valves 

Oil-Burner Governors 

Little Giant Improved 
Oil Burners 

Oil Pumping Sets 

Oil Valves 

Oil Strainers 

Steam ОП Strainers 


Wo шы Flow Steam Duplex Oil Pomps 
Thermostats Rotary Oil Pumps 


Reducing Valves Boiler Feed Pumpa 


$7 Boiler Feed-Water 
Regulators 


VAUGHN -G. E. WITT CO., Engineers 
C. W. VAUGHN, President and Manager 
MANUFACTURERS AND DISTRIBUTORS 


4221-28 Hollis St. Phone OL утріс 6084 
Emeryville, Oakland, Calif. 


Water Heaters 
011 Meters 


VENETIAN BLINDS 


Control light and air without 
draft or glare 


For public buildings, 
offices, stores and homes, 
in colors to suit. 


GUNN, CARLE & CO. 


20 Potrero Ave. San Francisco UNderhill 5480 


67 


The new Decatur 
De Luxe Lavatory, 
illustrated here, is 
representative of 
the MUELLER 
line of quality vit- 
reous china. 


MUELLER CO. 


Decatur, Ill. 
San Francisco Branch: 
1072-76 Howard St. 


The Modern Way— 
BUILD WITH STEEL 


Protect your Investment from 
Fire and Quake 
Structural Steel for Buildings 
and Bridges 


JUDSON-PACIFIC CO. 


609 MISSION STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 
DOuglas 4460 


Plants, San Francisco and Oakland 


MARBLE GLASS 


A new decorative building material of 

exceptional beauty—looks like genuine 

marble with its innumerable delicate 
veins and royal colors. 


Ü For New and Remodeled Build- 
Cr ings, Store Fronts, Hotel Lobbies, 1 


Office Buildings, Vestibules, Etc. 


MacGRUER & COMPANY 


266 Tehama Street 


San Francisco 


W.8 J. SLOANE 


Established 1843 


RUGS : CARPETS 
LINOLEUMS 
WINDOW SHADES 
Phone: GArfield 2827 
FURNITURE 


DRAPERIES 
Estimates Gladly Submitted 


216-228 SUTTER STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 


68 


enough money is in hand to satisfy laborers, and 
lienors previously giving notice within the limited 
time; and he may make such progress payments 
to lien claimants who give such notice after the 
limited time or who do not give such notice, pro- 
vided he retains sufficient funds to cover amounts 
due all laborers and amounts included in notices 
previously or thereafter given. 

7. Among lien claimants, liens are decreed 
within the unpaid remainder of the contract price 
with the following priorities: (1) To laborers; 
(2) to claimants giving the informal notice within 
the limited time; (3) to other lien claimants ех- 
cept the contractor; (4) to the contractors. Liens 
are satisfied from funds available for the purpose 
as follows: (1) To laborers, pro rata; and (2) 
to all other lienors, pro rata. 

8. The owner may relieve his real property 
of liability for liens by requiring a bond of the 
contractor; the order of priority of claims and 
their satisfaction in such case being determined 
according to the lien machinery as set up in the 
act. 

9. Penal provisions are made for owners who, 
with intent to defraud, use proceeds of loans on 
real estate secured for building enterprises for 
purposes other than the satisfaction of lien claims, 
and for others, as contractors or subcontractors, 
to whom such funds are paid and who use them 
for other purposes while lienable debts are unpaid, 
and for intentional misstatements made by the 
contractor in the statement required by subsection 
3 of section 4 with reference to the amount of the 
contract price unpaid. 

10. An owner, contractor or subcontractor 
must, in making payments to a party with whom 
he has a number of accounts, specify the account 
to which the payment must be applied or suffer 
the loss that may arise from misapplication of the 
payment. Conversely, when a materialman or sub- 
contractor receives payment for materials, he may 
demand a designation of the account to which it 
must be applied. 

11. Materials delivered but not used on an 
improvement of real estate may be repossessed by 
one furnishing the same: such materials ordinarily 
not being attachable for debts of the purchaser. 

12. Where an improvement on land is made 
at the request of one not having title to said land, 
the improvement is liable for liens and may be 
removed if practicable. 

13. Where an improvement is ordered by a 
husband or wife when they live together, the other 
having knowledge thereof is bound unless he or 
she makes written objection thereto within 10 
days. 

14. Insurance proceeds received from an im- 
provement are subject to liens for which the real 
property is liable. 


The Architect and Enginccr, February, 1933 


15. Forms are provided for the informal notice 
hereinbefore mentioned, the bond to relieve the 
land from liability for liens, and the formal claim 
of lien to be recorded. 

16. Claims for more than one improvement on 
a single tract may be combined in one noticc, and 
for improvements on several lots in one operation 
the total amount may be apportioned to each prop- 
erty; they may be amended where detriment is 
not caused to another; and they may be assigned 
in writing after being filed. 

17. Copies of claims of lien as recorded 
amendments thereto and assignments thereof must 
be served on the owner by personal or by sub- 
stituted service according to a procedure set forth 
in the act. 

18. Liens filed for record take priority over a 
conveyance or other encumbrance not recorded 
or docketed at the time of the visible commence- 
ment of operations. 

19. A lien endures for one year after record- 
ing, during which time suit must be started to 
enforce it; and liens may be discharged of record 
in several ways prescribed by the act. 


20. The owner may relieve the real property 
of the burden of a recorded lien by filing a cash 
deposit or a special bond, in which event the lia- 
bility of the real property for the lien is trans- 
ferred to the substituted security. 

21. Copies of the contract may be demanded 
of the owner or contractor by any one employed 
to furnish work or materials, and the owner may 
demand of any such person a statement of his 
account. 

22. Acceptance of unsecured notes for labor 
or services or for materials is not a waiver of the 
right to claim a lien therefor; and the lien remedy 
does not preclude the enforcement of the claim in 
an ordinary law action. 

23. Other procedural provisions are those giv- 
ing the right to consolidate all actions on lien 
claims into one action; the right to proceed against 
one personally liable, in addition to proceeding 
against the real property; the right to a deficiency 
judgment against the defendant where the real 
property is insufficient; and the optional provision 
for redemption from sale for those jurisdictions 
where redemption from mortgage foreclosures are 
permitted. 

24. Formal provisions, common in all uniform 
acts prepared by the National Conference of Com- 
missioners on Uniform State Laws, are: That 
making the act inapplicable to enterprises under- 
way when the act becomes effective, which effec- 
tive date is fixed; those providing that the act be 
liberally construed, and so as to effectuate uni- 
formity; that fixing a short title; the "severability" 
clause, to save the remaining parts if some parts 
are held unconstitutional. 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


ARCHITECTS, We Specialize in 
SOUND CONTROL 
and 
Insulation Materials 


E. K. WOOD LUMBER CO. 
Lumber and Millwork 


SAN FRANCISCO - OAKLAND - LOS ANGELES 


Recent Contracts Completed— 


FORD ASSEMBLY PLANTS AT 
SEATTLE, LONG BEACH 
AND RICHMOND 


Clinton Construction Company 
of California 


Builders and Managers 


of Construction 


923 FOLSOM STREET SAN FRANCISCO 
Telephone SUtter 3440 


You will wish to read 
these articles — 


A series of four papers by Елірн D. CORNELL 


and 
Gro. D. Нл. of Los Angeles 


On— Landscape Architecture 
City Planning 
Park and Recreation Areas 
Begins March issue of 
THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER 


KAWNEER 
MODERNISTIC CONSTRUCTION 
FOR 
TODAY’S STORE FRONT 


Through years of experience Kawneer 
craftsmen have acquired the art of ren- 
dering in metal distinctive and efficient 
store fronts of any size or design. 


KAWNEER MFG. CO. 


BERKELEY CALIFORNIA 


69 


JOH t 2 "B i TE aN A Sd Шут ON 


For use in Commercial and 


Industrial Buildings, Apart- 


ment Houses and Homes. 


е 
$. T. Johnson Со. 


Main Office and Factory 
940-950 Arlington St., Oakland 


STRUCTURAL STEEL 


WESTERN IRON WORKS 
141-147 BEALE STREET 
132-148 MAIN STREET 


San Francisco Phone DAvenport 2575 


BOILERS 
for 
Every Purpose 


637 Minna Street, San Francisco, Calif. 
Phone: MArket 3612 


JOSEPH MUSTO 
SONS-KEENAN 
COMPANY 


MARBLE 


and 
535 NORTH POINT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


1801 S. SOTO STREET 
LOS ANGELES 


70 


PATENTED ARCHITEC- 


TURE AND BUILDINGS 


Substitute for Marble 


Anthony M. Zottali, Quincy, 
Massachusetts, has been granted 
a patent for manufacturing a 
building material in sheet form to 
be used mainly as a substitute for 
travertine or Italian marble for the 
construction of walls and for other 
portions of buildings. 

The invention comprises a build- 
ing product in sheet form provided 
with a plastic surface having a 
characteristic appearance imparted 
to it by the formation of cavities 
of irregular shape and of varying 
size, preferably arranged to ap- 
pear like travertine or Italian 
marble, in veins extending across 
the surface of the material. The 
cavities are formed in the plastic 
material by gas generated in the 
upper portions of the plastic mate- 
rial adjacent the surface thereof. 

The base of the material, pref- 
erably of a fibrous nature such as 
fibrous wall board, may be read- 
ily attached to a building struc- 
ture to provide a wall or other 
surface having the artistic appear- 
ance of travertine or an ltalian 
marble. The cavities in the sur- 
face resemble closely the natural 
porosity of the surface of genuine 
travertine. 


New Floor Construction 


Paul С. Heidman, Detroit, 
Michigan, has a new method of 
floor construction, whereby a dur- 
able upper layer may be mounted 
on a non-yielding base and a res- 
ilient floor provided. The inven- 
tion is particularly adaptable in 
use in mounting on a base or slab 
formed from concrete or other 
similar material, an upper wearing 
surface formed from concrete or 
the like and so mounted on the 
base as to be yieldable. 

On the usual concrete base is 
spread a coating of hot asphalt 
while the asphalt is in its plastic 
condition. A layer of fibrous та- 
terial is then applied to the as- 


phalt and on top of this layer is 


GUILF OY 
Cornice Works 


General Sheet Metal 
Work 
Skylights 
Fire Doors 


GUILFOY CORNICE WORKS 
1234 Howard Street 
San Francisco 
Phone: MArket 0561 


John Rex 


@ Invites your inspec- 
tion of a choice col- 
lection of hand- 
made 17th and 18th 
century furniture. 


508 SUTTER STREET 


San Francisco 


Del Monte 
WHITE SAND 
Fan Shell — Beach 


WASHED IN FRESH WATER 
DRIED BY STEAM 
CLEAN BONE DRY 


eaa 
Del Monte Properties Company 


Phone GArfield 4533 


401 Crocker Building San Francisco 


Specify 


DICKEY 
CLAY 
PRODUCTS 


Dickey Mastertile Face Brick 
Partition Tile Fire Brick 


Drain Tile Paving Brick 
Fireproofing Tile Wall Coping 
Floor Tile Flue Lining 


Common Brick Dickey Flashing Blocks 


W. S. DICKEY CLAY MFG. 


COMPANY 
SAN FRANCISCO 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


McClintic-Marshall 
Corporation 
Subsidiary of ral Steel 
Bethlehem mum Corporation 
STEEL BRIDGES 
and BUILDINGS 


215 WEST SIXTH STREET 
LOS ANGELES 


2050 BRYANT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


SMITH 
Lumber Company 


OF OAKLAND 


Lumber and Mill Work 


19TH AVE. AND ESTUARY 
Oakland, California 
FRuitvale 3174 


ARMCO 


Special Analysis 
Iron and Steel 

Sheets and Plates 

For Building Construction 
ө 
THE AMERICAN ROLLING MILL CO. 

540 Tenth Street, San Francisco 

Phone: MArket 3195 
32 W. Connecticot Street, Seattle 


v 


Specify Armco Sheets and 
Plates for all purposes 
where durahle, finely- 
finished construction is 
required, 


TRANSIT-MIX 
CONCRETE 


A Perfect-Blend 
Material 


Golden Gate Atlas 
Materials Co. 


Sixteenth and Harrison Streets 
San Francisco 
Phone HEmlock 7020 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


spread a waterproof coating of 
asphalt or the like. On top of this 
is poured a top cover of plastic or 
concrete material which forms the 


wearing surface. 
* * * 


Non-Fading Asbestos Cement 

This invention, patented by Wil- 
liam J. Moeller of Mount Healthy, 
Ohio, is for an asbestos cement 
building material which will not 
discolor or fade after exposure to 
the weather. 

The inventor has discovered a 
process of manufacture in which 
the hydraulic cement, asbestos and 
water are first mixed to form a 
homogeneous mass which is spread 
over a support, forming a mass of 
even thickness, and then mineral 
particles or granules of one or 
more colors are irregularly applied 
to a portion of the surfaces of the 
wet mass. He then, by removing 
a portion of the moisture, forms 
on a cylinder a series of lamina- 
tions, the first lamination being 
formed with that portion of the 
mass upon which the granules 
have been placed so that the gran- 
ules are in contact with the cylin- 
der. The laminated sheet, after 
the desired number of laminations 
are formed, is then removed from 
the cylinder and placed on a flat 
surface so that the mineral par- 
ticles are on top. This sheet may 
then be cut or trimmed to desired 
size or form and then cured in the 
course of which the adjacent plies 
become so intimately amalgamated 
that a relatively integral sheet is 
formed. This produces a product 
in which the surface has a plural- 
ity of colors, formed by irregularly 
shaped and irregularly arranged 
particles separated by areas of as- 
bestos cement arranged in minute 
planes at various angles to each 
other, so that the result is an un- 
even surface. The areas between 
the mineral particles consist large- 
ly of elevations and valleys, in 
which the elevations are like the 
apex of a cone. The result of this 
surface formation is that the irreg- 
ularly shaped and irregularly ar- 
ranged, with respect to the plane 
of the surface particles, are held 


YOUNG 
& 
HORSTMEYER 


GENERAL 
CONTRACTORS 


461 Market Street 


San Franctsco 


Phone SUtter 6257—58 
Paul B. Young A. L. Horstmeyer 


REPUBLIC STEEL 


CORPORATION 


Ra 


Manufacturers of 
ENDURO Stainless Steel; ТОМ. 
CAN Copper Molybdenum Ітоп 
Sheets and Pipe; and Steel Pipe, 
Sheets and Reinforcing Bar for 

every building purpose. 
Write for information 


Rialto Bailding, San Francisco, Calif. 
First Natl, Bank Bldg., Los Angeles 
Smith Tower Building, Seattle, Wash. 


MERCURY PRESS 


We Print 
The ARCHITECT and 
ENGINEER 


“A Thing of Beauty 
Is a Joy Forever” 


942 HOWARD STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


Grinnell Automatic 
SPRINKLER 


GRINNELL COMPANY 
OF THE PACIFIC 


ENGINEERS AND 
CONTRACTORS 


VALVES, PIPE and FITTINGS 


601 BRANNAN STREET 
San Francisco 


71 


Phone DOuglas 1120-1121 


Larsen and Larsen 


General Contractors 


v 


629 BRYANT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


FORDERER 
CORNICE WORKS 


Copper Roofs 
Galvanized Iron Work 
Elevator Doors 


269 Potrero Avenue, San Francisco 
Phone HEmlock 4100 


72 


Robert W. Hunt Company 
ENGINEERS 
Inspection - Tests - Consultation 
Inspection and Tests of Structural 
Steel, Reinforcing Steel 
and Cement. 
Field Inspection and Supervision 
of Consruction of Steel and 
Conerete Structures. 


Cement, Concrete, Chemical, Met- 
allurgical, X-Ray and Physieal 
Laboratories. 


Chicago - New York - Pittsburgh 
АП Large Cities 
San Franeisco, 251 Kearny Street 


Chicago 


HOSPITAL 


SILENT CALL 
SIGNAL SYSTEMS 


GARNETT YOUNG AND CO. 
Pacific Coast Sales Engineers 
390 FOURTH ST., SAN FRANCISCO 


Los Angeles 


Seattle Portland 


in the product so that a portion 
of a particle is exposed and gives 
an area of the color of the gran- 
ules, while the asbestos cement 
forms uneven areas, between the 
granules, of different color to the 
granules. This construction af- 
fords areas of asbestos cement be- 
tween particles or granules of 
mineral that by reason of their 
surface formation permit free lime 
to arise to the surface of the 
areas, form a film over same and 
remain there until washed or 
weathered away by exposure to 
the weather. This free lime film 
by reason of the minute hills and 
valleys in the areas of asbestos 
between particles or granules of 
mineral remains in the valleys 
and covers only the areas of as- 
bestos cement without flowing over 
the mineral of different color and 
as a result, the product retains the 
color of the mineral particles іп 
contrast to the asbestos cement 
areas coated with a film of free 
lime. As the asbestos cement 
in its natural color and the free 
lime are about the same shade, 
the film of lime on these areas is 
not objectionable. 


* * * 


Metallic House Framing 

Herbert Ridgway, Brooklyn, New 
York, has been granted a patent 
for metallic house framing. The 
frames can be made up in stand- 
ard units, according to pre-design 
factory specifications and may be 
easily erected by moderately skill- 
ed labor. The invention also in- 
volves the use of a minimum num- 
ber of frames and separate pieces 
of light weight and maximum 
strength. 

The walls are of the skeleton 
type made up of a plurality of 
rows of frame units with a num- 
ber of frame units in each row. 
Each frame is formed of channel 
irons with the webs at the outside 
and perpendicular to the plane of 
the unit and with the flanges par- 
allel to the plane of the unit. The 
vertical sides of the frame units 
constitutes studs, each stud com- 
prising the adjacent channel irons 
of adjacent frame units, the studs 


REG. U. S. PAT. OFF. 


“Моге than a 


building paper" 


b d 


THE SISALKRAFT CO. 
205 West Wacker Drive 
(Canal Station) Chicago, Ill. 


55 New Montgomery Street 
San Francisco, Calif. 


CRANE 


High Class Plumbing 
Fixtures 


bd 


ll № 


ALL PRINCIPAL Coast CITIES 


THE TORMEY 
COMPANY 


GENERAL PAINTERS 


AND DECORATORS 


Phone UNderhill 1913 


563 FULTON STREET 
San Franciseo 


W. H. PICARD, Inc. 


PLUMBING, HEATING, 
VENTILATING and 
POWER PLANTS 


5656 College Avenue 
5662 Keith Avenue 
Oakland California 
Phones РІ edmont 9004-9005 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


OCEAN SHORE 


Твом WORKS 


550-558 EIGHTH STREET 
MA rket 0462-0463 


California 


San Francisco 


NP 
STEAM BOILERS 
STEEL TANKS 


SMOKE STACKS 
e WATER « 
e HEATERS e 


LUXOR 


WINDOW SHADES 


Translucent Shading 
of highest count 
cambric 


William Volker & Co. 


631 Howard Street 
San Francisco 


CLERVI 
MARBLE CO. 


MANUFACTURING CONTRACTORS 


Foreign and Domestic 
Marbles 


Interior & Exterior Buildings 


Office & Mill, 1721 San Bruno Ave. 


Phone MI ssion 6625 
SAN FRANCISCO, CAL. 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1953 


of the upper row of units being in 
alignment with the respective 
studs of the lower row of units. 
The floor beams have their ends 
secured to and between the re- 
spective lower and upper studs. 

* * * 

Lighter Concrete [юг Bridges 

Karl P. Billner of New York, 
New York, an invention relating 
to concrete bridges, the main ob- 
ject of which is to reduce the cost 
of construction without impairing 
the strength of the structure. The 
inventor claims he is able to make 
a concrete bridge of not more than 
half the weight of that now re- 
quired for equal strength, and for 
less money. 

A filling material is utilized in 
the construction of the concrete 
bridge of a porous nature. This 
material is a form of concrete, the 
major bulk of which is composed 
of pores or cells, so that the 
weight is less than half as much as 
earth, for example, for the same 
cubical contents. The filling ma- 
terial is self contained and prac- 
tically non-absorbent to water, so 
that there is по hydrostatic 
stresses to be taken care of and in 
consequence the usual side panels 
of a concrete bridge may be omit- 
ted, thus further reducing the 
weight. 

By using this type of filling ma- 
terial a practically monolithic 
structure is obtained, consisting of 
concrete in part for the wearing 
surface and an interposed mono- 
lithic filling of porous concrete for 
the non-wearing portion of the 
bridge. 

The structure consists mainly 
of a solid concrete arch bridge 
comprising a solid concrete arch 
and having a wearing surface of 
solid concrete above the arch and 
an interposed monolithic filling of 
light weight porous material be- 
tween the concrete arch and the 
wearing surface. 

а в € 

Further particulars regarding 
these patents may be obtained by 
addressing ]. Kaplan, Washing- 
ton Loan & Trust Building. Wash- 
ington, D. C. 


umm 7 mm www Sr 
wm M Ua zi 
y 
| ( 4; 
) D т. E R Co, 


" MANUFACTURING 6 CONTRACTORS \ 
COMPLETE INSTALLATIONS 2 i 


(rens “BANK, RESTAURANT - ‚ОРЕХ 


FIXTURES Ф, 


SECTIONAL: ‘PARTITIONS ` aÑ iN 
\ Tejephine КЕ аглу] 518 
Ne 892, BRI ANN. " a MN 


NON Y 
SAM MSS NS S P 


NSSINCE 827 


BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 


Recent Contracts Completed 
У. W. С. A. Building 
San Francisco 

Library Building 
Berkeley 

Post Office Building 
Oakland 

City Hospital 
Palo Alto 

Home of the Blind 
Berkeley 


K. E. PARKER CO., INC. 
135 South Park San Francisco 
Phone KE arny 6640 


Phone GArfield 1164 


Hunter & Hudson 


Consulting Engineers 


DESIGNERS OF HEATING 
AIR CONDITIONING 
VENTILATING AND WIRING 
SYSTEMS, MECHANICAL 
AND ELECTRICAL EQUIP- 
MENT OF BUILDINGS 
ео 


41 SUTTER STREET 
ROOM 710 
San Francisco 


California 


DINWIDDIE 
CONSTRUCTION 
COMPANY 


Builders of the new gymna- 
sium, University of Cali- 


fornia; Grace Cathedral, 
Russ Building and Hartford 
Insurance Building, San 
Francisco; Life Science 
Building, University of Сай- 
fornia, Berkeley. 


CROCKER BUILDING 
SAN FRANCISCO 


McNEAR BRICK 


FOR 
Beauty and 
Permanence 
ENO 
McNear Brick Company 


Main Office and Factories 
McNEAR POINT 
San Rafael, Calif. 


San Francisco Office and Yard 


417 BERRY STREET 


Architectural 
Metals 


Mouldings --- Grilles 


Tubing ~- Ornaments 
of ect 
Steel --- Bronze 


Aluminum 


BRAUN-STEEPLE CO.,LTD. 
636 Potrero Avenue 
San Francisco 
1203 E. 8th Street 
Los Angeles 


APEX 
> ELECTRICWaer 
HEATERS 


CA] It costs less to 
install an APEX 
Electric heater 

in the bathroom 

than to install а 

hot air duct or 

radiator. Heat is 
available twenty- 
four hours per 
day and it quali- 
fies for the low 
heating rate. 


n 
= 
~. 
м, 


% ф 
Е A (^w УЕ = 
3 Nn nup 4 
— BED ЖЫ mE 


те 


Send for Architects" Catalogue 


Bathroom Heaters in the Standard 
Colors, 1000 to 2500 Watts 
$12.50 to $35.00 


APEX MANUFACTURING CO. 
1501 Powell Street 
Emeryville, Oakland, Calif. 


Distributors 


Sandoval Sales Co. 
Phone KE arny 7010 
557 Market Street 
San Francisco, Calif. 


Apex Sales Co. 
Phone MU tual 9141 
1855 Industrial Street 

Los Angeles, Calif. 


ue 


1933 TO MARK TURN 
Ву А. Е. Dickinson 


President, Indiana Limestone Company 


Looking ahead, 1933 promises 
to mark the turn to a new period 
of construction activity. 


А reservoir of building require- 
ments has developed over three 
extremely dull years in the con- 
struction industry. If history re- 
peats itself, the pendulum will 
swing far in the other direction 
once the revival has set in. 


In order to visualize the falling 
off in building, the totals for the 
nation for each year, beginning 
in 1925, are enlightening: 


[075 pe $6,664,935,314 
1926........ 6,530,470,453 
1927........ 6,871,661,253 
Ig... 7,232,246,849 
O corse 6,282,694,491 
ОЗО 4,930,739,914 
КӨЗ... 3,457,524,605 
1,500,000,000 


Leaders of the building indus- 
try, and economists who have 
studied trends covering a long 
period of years, have all sought 
to determine when the upturn will 
develop. It is now felt that at the 
first signs of industrial activity 
being revivified and with a genu- 
ine strengthening of the invest- 
ment market, the building tide will 
turn, and that replacement will 
require an extended period of ac- 
tivity. 

Housing space has developed 
an acute shortage in these three 
years. The extent of this shortage, 
some of it due to obsolescence and 
decay, would be painfully appar- 
ent if the hundreds of thousands 
of families now doubling up with 
friends and relatives, were to re- 
gain employment and begin 
spreading out in individual homes. 

All authorities expect residen- 
tial building to mark the beginning 
of the new cycle. 

It is the history of the building 
industry, however, that once a re- 
vival sets in, regardless of the 
branch of the industry affected, 
activity is almost invariably re- 


MULLEN MFG. 
COMPANY 


BANK, STORE AND OFFICE 

FIXTURES—CABINET WORK 

OF GUARANTEED QUALITY 
CHURCH SEATING 


Office and Factory: 
64 RAUSCH ST., Bet. 7th and 8th Sts. 
San Francisco 
Telephone HE mlock 2858 


G. P. W. Jensen & Son 


Building Construction 


320 Market Street, San Francisco 
Phone 2444 


MacDonald & Kahn 


General 
Contractors 


CNO 


Financial Center Bldg. 
405 Montgomery St. 


San Francisco 


WEDGE NOTCH COLUMN CLAMPS 


FOR 
Rapidity, Economy 
and Efficiency 
USE 
STEELFORMS 
FOR 
Concrete Construction 


STEELFORM 
CONTRACTING CO. 


SAN FRANCISCO 
PORTLAND 


DOVETAIL ANCHOR SLOT 


Los ANGELES 
SEATTLE 


o 
a 
mI 
о 
u 
ч. 
< 
о 
[7] 
[4 
ш 
[e] 
2. 
о 
= 
ш 
ES 
к 
Е 
a 


STEEL,CONSTRUCTION TOWERS 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


Anderson & Ringrose 


General Contractors 


320 Market Street, San Francisco 
Phone DO uglas 1373 


СС 2m 


What architecta and all who build have 
Я learned to expect from Quandt craftsmen: 


“Co-operation for Quality” 
Materials applied efficiently and expeditiously 


by brush or spray application to achieve the 
| best result at the minimum cost to the owner. 


A. Quandt & Sons 


Painters and Decorators 
Since 1885 

d 374 GUERRERO STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 

Telephone MArket 1711 

у ean 

Quandt-quality is available for the small fob 

as well as the large. Pioneers and Special- 

M ists in the application of Lacquer in the 

4 architectural field. Complete decorative 

color schemes designed and furnished. 

Advice for technical painting requirements 

furnished. Our operations are state-wide. 


BATES-CARPENTER 
COMPANY 


Distributors of 
Building Specialties 


Atsco Roller Screens 
Atsco Tubular Metal Screens 
Fereous and Non Fereous Metal 


Medicine Cases—Wood and Steel 
Troning Boards—Wood and Steel 


Shower Doors—Bronze and Aluminum 
Ariston Steel Windows 


Estimates Furnished without Obligation 
557 MARKET STREET 
San Francisco, Calif. SUtter 5328 


LEAT AER-STEEL 
RUBBER-COCOA 
WOOD 


Mats and Mattings 
Ezy-Rug Carpet-Tex 


Manufactured and Installed by 


LEATHER 
MAT MFG. CO., Inc. 


340 Sansome St. San Francisco 
р 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


newed at once in all branches of 
construction and the industry is 
strained to meet demands. ІР this 
were ever overcome it would be a 
tremendous stabilizer of employ- 
ment. 

Under the current Federal 
building program, approximately 
$200,000,000 of construction work 
will be done in 1933. About one- 
fifth of the total is allocated to 
New York City. 

There is every sound reason to 
believe that the building industry 
has passed through the most 
tragic year it has ever known. 


HOOVER DAM NOTES 


When the Bureau of Reclama- 
tion begins its purchase of 4,000,- 
000 barrels of cement for the mass 
concrete in the Hoover Dam, hun- 
dreds of men will be given em- 
ployment in near-by cement plants 
which will run to capacity for two 
years in order to supply the de- 
mand, 


Six Companies Inc., has con- 
structed 703 buildings at Boulder 
City at a total cost of $1,130,000. 
These buildings comprise 16 dor- 
mitories, 10 four- and five-room 
cottages, 136 three-room cottages, 
264 two-room cottages, 250 one- 
room cottages, 1 executive lodge, 
2 residences for general superin- 
tendent and insurance supervisor, 
1 commissary, | commissary ware- 
house, 3 general warehouses, 2 
office buildings, 1 machine shop, 
1 hospital, 2 garages, 1 clubhouse, 
1 laundry, 3 mess halls and mess- 
hall dormitories, 1 nurse's resi- 
dence, 1 doctor's residence, 1 cold 
storage building, 1 carpenter shop, 
1 schoolhouse, 1 railroad апа 
gravel plant shop and warehouse, 
1 warehouse addition and office, 
1 warehouse for Government ma- 
terial. Nearly all of these build- 
ings are located in Boulder City. 


Thirty small houses from the 
famous "Olympic Village", used 
by Olympiad athletes in Los An- 
geles last year, have been moved 
to Boulder City and will help to 


Fenestra 


STEEL 
WINDOWS 


For Every Type of Building 


DETROIT STEEL PRODUCTS 
COMPANY 
Pacific Coast Factory: Oaklend 
Branches 
Loa Angeles 


San Franciaco Seattle 


Good Buildings Deserve 
Good Hardware 


UD 


PALACE HARDWARE 00] 


581 Market Street 
SUtter 6063 


Office 


Partitions 


Reinhold sectional wood aad 
glass partitions (interchange- 
able) may be adapted to any 
modern office requirement in a 
new or old building. 


Complete Information File 
sent on request 


Pacific Manufacturing 
Company 


High Class Interior Finish 
Quality Millwork 


Monadnock Bldg., 641 Merrill Ave, 
Sen Francisco Los Angelee 


СА rfield 7755 AX ridge 9011 


1313 Seventh Street, Oaklend 
GL encourt 7858 


- 
л 


solve the housing problem. Each 
house has two rooms and a bath. 


In manufacturing 1,000 cubic 
yards of concrete for the diversion 
tunnel lining, the Canyon mixing 
plant used approximately 1,330 
barrels of cement, 1,213 tons of 
gravel, 532 tons of sand. and 
22,500 gallons of water. 


THE HOUSE OF THE 
FUTURE 

What is claimed to be the home 
of the future, built of new syn- 
thetic materials, air- conditioned 
and humidified, fitted out with the 
latest labor-saving equipment, util- 
izing every foot of space, including 
the roof for the comfort of its oc- 
cupants, decorated, furnished and 
illuminated in modern fashion, will 
be demonstrated at Chicago's 1933 
World's Fair — “А Century of 
Progress Exposition." 

A group of exhibit houses util- 
izing many of these advances will 
be one of the features of the ex- 
hibit. Already applications for the 
construction of houses have been 
made by a number of firms. In 
addition a large number of pro- 
ducers of home equipment of all 
kinds will display their products. 
A pavilion devoted to air-condi- 
tioning, building materials and 
equipment and another pavilion 
featuring the decorative arts are 
planned. 


08 X 
BUILDING INVENTORIES 


The National Conference on 
Construction has issued a full re- 
port of fifty-seven pages entitled, 
"Local Construction Inventories." 
This report contains two sections 
under the sub-title, “General 
Statement", and "How to Make 
an Occupancy Survey." The re- 
port also contains statistical and 
trade information, business re- 
ports, etc. 

This is the first document made 
public by the National Conference 
on Construction, an organization 
comprising leaders in all branches 
of the construction industry. 


76 


The report is not considered as 
final. lt is anticipated that a model 
survey will be made at an early 
date in one of the large cities to 
demonstrate the practical working 
of such a program. 


HAS LICENSE SUSPENDED 


William E. Coffman, architect 
of Sacramento, who designed the 
new $300,000 Stanford Junior 
High School and several other 
structures in the Capital City, has 
had his license to practice archi- 
tecture suspended for thirty days 
because of “dishonest practice." 

The suspension was ordered by 
the State Board of Architectural 
Examiners of the Northern Dis- 
trict and will be in effect until 
March 6th, inclusive. 

The order followed a hearing in 
Sacramento, January 24th, when 
Miss Nelle U. Branch, librarian 
of Davis, Yolo County, charged 
that "besides general negligence, 
substitutions had been made 
throughout the construction of her 
home in College Park, thereby 
cheapening the building and ren- 
dering it unsafe." 

Fifteen separate charges were 
lodged against Coffman. 


CONCRETE PUMP 

The Chain Belt Company of 
Milwaukee has issued a folder 
illustrating Pumpcrete, a concrete 
pump and the Rex Go-Devil, a 
concrete pipe cleaning device, 
which chases the concrete through 
the entire pipe line. 

Full information regarding these 
two labor and time saving devices 
may be had by communicating 
with the above company. 


MORAL — EMPLOY AN 
ARCHITECT 


The president of a New Eng- 
land mortgage company is author- 
ity for the statement that his com- 
pany lost more money on build- 
ings built without complete archi- 
tectural service than through all 
other sources. 


ENGINEERS' 
DAY 


Seventh Annual Engineers’ 
Day will be held at the 
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 
Campus, BERKELEY 
March 10 


” 


Fifty or more demonstrations 
wil be given, including the 
following: 


A Symposium on Welding. 


Bay Bridge and Golden Gate 
Bridge Models. 


Television. 
Liquid Air. 


Airplane Construction. 
т” 


Engineers, Architects апа 
Builders are cordially in- 
vited to attend. Open house 
from 1:00 to 6:00 P. M. 


John Grace 
P. F. Reilly 


Building 


Contractors 


and Managers of 


Construction 


CLAUS SPRECKELS 
BUILDING 


San Francisco 


Telephone GArfield 7742 


The Architect and Engineer, February, 1933 


ТНЕ 
ARCHITECT 


AND 
ENGINEER 


MARCA 1933 


CONTEMPORARY 
AMERICAN ARCHITECTS 


ELY JACQUES KAHN 


RALPH ADAMS CRAM 


CONTEMPORARY 
AMERICAN 
ARCHITECTS 


Edited by Arthur T. North | 


ERE are three books, each presenting studies, chiefly 

pictorial, of examples of the work of an outstanding, 
present-day American architect. The examples Бауе been 
selected both for their importance and for their exemplifi- 
cation of the qualities which are characteristic of the work 
of these men. They give a concrete picture of the inter- 
pretation which each is giving to the problems of modern 
American architecture. 


These books are intended to provide architects, drafts- 
men, students and interested laymen an opportunity to 
study contemporary American architecture in a less ex- 
pensive form than that of the limited editions of ponderous 
de luxe architectural books. 


The books offer the means of acquiring a knowledge of 
the underlying causes of the diversified manifestations of 
contemporary American architecture, and striking indica- 
tions of future trends. Each monograph is largely the prod- 
uct of the architect and is bighly individual in character. 
Besides photographs of the architect’s works, biographical 
and descriptive notes are given in each volume. 


Three volumes 
devoted to the work of 
ELY JACQUES KAHN 
RAYMOND M. HOOD 
RALPH ADAMS CRAM 


Price $8.00 for the set or $3.00 per volume 


Published by 
MeGRAW-HILL BOOK COMPANY, Inc. 


| 
Orders received at the office of THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER, 1662, Russ 
Building, San Francisco, where the books are on file for inspection. 


MI 
midi B r^ 


Hawthorne Intermediate School E. Norman Brydges, Architect 
Elmhurst, Illinois Chicago and Elmhurst 


{BUILDING 


JOHNSON HEAT CONTROL KEEPS STEP WITH THOSE CHANGES ... 


CONTINUAL ADVANCEMENT AND CAREFUL STUDY OF NEW REQUIREMENTS FOR 


NEARLY HALF A CENTURY! 


e o o LHe onicixar, uxrr of the school building pictured above was 
built in 1919 and heated hy a “direct blast" system. Johnson auto- 
matic heat regulation was installed to operate mixing dampers at the 
double plenum chamber, mixing hot and tempered air as required for 
each room. 

In 1926 and 1927, the first and second additions were constructed and 
are heated by means of a “split” system. Johnson apparatus controls 
the direct radiators in the rooms and also maintains a uniform temper- 
ature in the ducts supplying air for ventilation. The original heating 
plant was not disturbed. 

The third addition, 1929, is heated and controlled in the same manner. 
When this addition was built, the heating system in the original unit 
was changed to a split system, and the same Johnson thermostats were 
arranged to control the new heating apparatus. 

In 1932, unit ventilators were installed in the fourth addition. Again 
the Johnson System was employed, this time to control valves and 
dampers in the unit ventilators, together with valves on the auxiliary 


radiators. 


FIVE BUILDING PROJECTS 88 THREE METHODS OF HEATING 
ONE SYSTEM OF HEAT CONTROL 


JOHNSON SERVICE COMPANY 
Main Office and Factory 


MANUFACTURERS 
ENGINEERS 
CONTRACTORS 


A Single Orgamization 
Operating Through 
Direct factory. 

Branches 


MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN JOHNSON 


Branch Offices in All Principal Cities H E AT d Q N т R @ IL 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


THERE shonld be а conserted 
movement on the part of San Francisco 
contractors and building material com- 
panies to secure all contracts on the new 
Bay bridge. It would be a calamity to 
the community to have these contracts 
go to outside firms. Local industries pay 
taxes and insurance and employ resident 
help which means they are entitled to 
preference over outside firms. Great quan- 
tities of steel, cement and lumber will be 
needed and we are as well equipped to 
supply these materials as Eastern firms. 
The steel fabrication could be distributed 
around to the six or more steel compan- 
ies in San Francisco whose plants are at 
present practically at a standstill. We 
fail to see where the billions of dollars 
to be put into the construction of this 
bridge will benefit the Bay region unless 
San Francisco and Oakland firms are 
given some consideration. A Eastern firm 
might be awarded the bulk of the steel 
contract conditionally that it sublet to 
local shops. Some such plan would work 
untold benefits to INorthern and Central 
California. Since the above was written 
the Columbia Stecl Company of Pitts- 
burgh, California, has submitted low bids 
on two bridge units which is most grati- 
fying. 

With reference to further assistance 
from the Reconstruction Finance Corpor- 
ation, {in addition to the bridge) Charles 
Б. Abbott, executive director of the Amer- 
ican Institute of Steel Construction, stated 
while on a visit to this city recently, that 
“only a small portion of the $1,500,000,- 
000 made available has been loaned, be- 
cause of the very strict interpretation by 
the Corporations counsel of the term 
self-liquidating.” Mr. Abbott stated the 
acnte unemployment situation demanded 
that more jobs should be provided and 
something should be done to make the 
Federal funds available to start utilitar- 
ian public works wherever they may be 
needed, or such public works as may be 
refinanced, even though they may not be 
strictly classified as self-liquidating. 


ия и в 


THERE seems to be a concerted 
movement all over the country to recon- 
dition, remodel and modernize buildings 
that have shown signs of obsolescence. 
With no immediate prospects of new 
construction work of any importance, ex- 
cept public work, architects should do all 
they can to stimulate reconditioning and 
modernization. The California State As- 
sociation could spend some of its money 
advising the public of the possibilities of 


4 


ү Thumb Tacks and T- бо 


remodeling, explaining the present low 
cost of such improvements and showing 
the owner how much better his chances 
are of renting his property if it is put in 
uptodate condition. 

Joseph D. Leland, a Boston architect, 
has written a letter to President Russell 
of the Institute, urging that organization 
to appeal to Chapter members to join 
in a united movement for the encourage- 
ment of small alteration work. Most 
architects appear to take little interest 
in the matter, We quote here from Mr. 
Leland's letter, which by the way, has 
been indorsed in toto by Mr. Russell: 


“It seems to me a great deal of edu- 
cational work is necessary, and why 
shouldn't the architects be the practical 
educators and advance a program to 
property owners, impressing upon them 
the personal and self-interest advantages 
attached to proper maintenance, remod- 
eling, alterations, etc. I feel that there 
is a great opportunity for the architects 
throughout the country to cooperate. 
especially at this time, in reconditioning, 
remodeling, and modernizing. If the arch- 
itects could be made to feel that no mat- 
ter how small a job is—even if they are 
only called in for one hour of consulta- 
tion and paid five dollars—if their advice 
is good and produces results, they would 
soon find that their client would return 
for further advice, and eventually the 
same client might employ the architect 
on new work of greater magnitude. 


“I remember a story that Mr. Brown 
of Minneapolis once told me of a farmer 
who lived some distance away and who 
came into his office in connection with 
some plans for a small house. He took 
a lot of Mr. Brown's time, Brown was 
agreeable, and interested, and the farmer 
left his office satisfied. A few years later 
the same farmer became one of Brown's 
best clients because of his influence in 
the affairs of the State in which he lived, 
and as І remember the story, Brown said 
that his office received a commission for 
a large public building through the cour- 
tesy and interest which he had extended 
to this man. 


"It is my humble opinion that it is of 
great importance for the members of our 
profession to cooperate in their localities 
with the many emergency organizations 
or community groups which have been 
established in so many cities and towns 
to relieve unemployment, by stimulating 
reconditioning, remodeling, and modern- 
izing. Would it not be quite worth while 
to give a portion of their time and advice 


where it is sought? The general public 
does not really know the services per- 
formed by the architectural profession, 
and a large majority think an architect is 
an aesthetic individual who draws pretty 
pictures which always cost twice as much 
to execute as he says they will." 
яи 2% 
FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT is 

quoted in the newspapers as having said: 

Im not what you'd call a modest man, 
I can build anything from a chicken coop 
to a cathedral. But 1 prefer building 
houses. 

The home of the finest architecture in 
America is the stretch of scenery between 
here and New Mexico. 


. LI * 


À woman is the greatest architect. 
Her name is Nature. 


. . ж 


Radio City is the tomb that marks the 
end of an era. Walter Lipman called 
Radio City a colossal pedestal for a pea- 


nut. 
* * * 


Skyscrapers are doomed. They are 
neither practical, economic or genuine 
expressions of the age. They are vain- 
glorious, misdirected efforts, built by am- 
bitious architects for ambitious tenants. 
Their day is past. Only blundering ex- 
ploiters will continue to build any more. 

ияи X 

АМ article on another page in this 
issue, furnished by the U. S. Department 
of Commerce, on "Building Cost Reduc- 
tions Seen in Radically Novel Wood 
Assembly Methods", is of particular in- 
terest to architects, since this new con- 
struction system involves economy, op- 
portunity for improved wood design, and 
slenderness and elegance in wood struc- 
tures. A forthcoming report on the sub- 
ject is sponsored by a special commit- 
tee appointed by the Secretary of Com- 
merce. The American Institute of Arch- 
itects is represented by F. Leo Smith, 
Technical Secretary of the Structural 
Service Department of the Institute. 


М. Max Dunning, F.A.1.A., of Chi- 
cago, has shown a deep interest in this 
work, and has authorized the following 
statement: 


“Modern connectors for timber con- 
struction broaden the opportunity for 
architectural consideration of wood, 
since slenderness of design is charac- 
teristic of this system.” 


The Architect and Engincer, March, 1933 


LOS ANGELES EARTHQUAKE EMPHASIZES 
NEED OF BETTER DESIGN AND MORE 
STRINGENT BUILDING CODES 


оГ; lesson of the Los 


Angeles earthquake, as it was of the Santa 
Barbara earthquake, is that only flimsy 
buildings of haphazard structural design 
go down before the temblor. 

One has only to look at the photographs 
of the buildings wrecked 
in Long Beach and Los 
Angeles — thin walls, 


soundly constructed, came through un- 
harmed. А striking example is St. Mary's 
Cathedral in San Francisco, which, though 
to all intents and purposes nothing but a 
vast shell, was undamaged by the 1906 
earthquake. That was sound design and 
construction. 

On the other hand, the Mission Church 
of San Juan Capistrano, 
fifty miles south of Los 
Angeles, which was built 


with little or no support 
derived from structural 
design. These are ob- 
viously cardboard build- 
ings. From some of the 
pictures it is plain that a 
Missouri mule would 
have to kick only a trifle 
harder than he does to 
bring down the wall of 
such a building. Cer- 
tainly a runaway auto- 
mobile could do it. 

On the other hand the 
lofty tower of the Los 
Angeles City Hall, rising 
428 feet in the air, though 
it did bow like a dancing 
master before the shock, 
came through the trial 
uninjured. Plaster may 


GAN earthquake of unusual 

intensity shocked South- 
ern California at 5:40 P. M., 
March 10th. Damage amount- 
ing to more than $60,000,000 
is reported to have been done 
and upwards of 150 lives 
were lost. Poorly designed 
buildings were badly dam- 
aged. Structures planned to 
resist earth stresses held up 
well. The fire loss was sur- 
prisingly small, being con- 
fined to an occasional school 
building outside of Los An- 
geles proper. 


by amateurs, was brought 
down by the earthquake 
of 1812 and forty per- 
sons killed. 

Sound design and con- 
struction stands up. After 
the Santa Barbara earth- 
quake there was a gen- 
eral movement in this 
State to strengthen build- 
ing codes. It is now stat- 
ed that the damage in 
Long Beach March 10th 
was much less than it 
would have been had it 
not been for better build- 
ings since the Santa Bar- 
bara lesson in 1925. 

Yet it is apparent from 
the Los Angeles county 
catastrophe that there is 


have fallen, but it does not take much to 
make plaster fall. 

No really sound building suffered, either 
in the Los Angeles shake or at Santa Bar- 
bara. No sound building suffered in the San 
Francisco earthquake, from the earthquake. 
San Francisco's down - town skyscrapers 
were burnt out by the ensuing conflagra- 
tion, but they had only to be cleaned out 
and refinished inside to be as good as ever. 

Even very old type buildings, when 


still too much flimsy construction. Build- 
ings are still put up to sell, or to rent, for 
quick profits, not to be proof against shock. 
The public is entitled to be protected from 
such construction. 


Now, with this lesson fresh in mind, 
would look to be a good time to strengthen 
the building codes to make sure that they 
will not permit public death traps to be 
erected. 

—San Francisco Chronicle. 


Architecture ~ and СТ rees 


q The architect’s problem in home planning is very often 
that of conserving and preserving the trees on the pro- 
posed site without depreciating the beauty of his architec- 
tural plans. 


Davey Tree Surgery Company, Ltd., with a background 

of over half a century of highly specialized experience, 
maintain four offices on the Pacific Coast fully manned by 
trained experts for the purpose of solving just such 
questions. 


Write or telephone any of our branches and safely 
state your problem without fear of obligation. 


Davey Tree Surgery Co., Lid. 


923 Seventh Street 972 Russ Building 1103 Story Building 430 Pacific Southwest Building 
FRANKLIN 6891 SUTTER 3377 TUcker 1929 WAKEFIELD 3006 
SAN DIEGO, CALIF. SAN FRANCISCO LOS ANGELES PASADENA, CALIF. 

6 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


ТНЕ 


VOLUME 112 
NUMBER 


ARCHITECT 


MARCH 


AND ENGINEER 


FREDERICK W. JONES, Editor 


EDGAR М. KIERULEE, 4:77. Editor 


Contribuling Editors 


CLARENCE R. WARD, Son Francisco 
CARLETON MONROE WINSLOW, 


Los Angeles 


HAROLD W. DOTY, Portlond, Ore. 
CHAS. H. ALDEN, Seatile, Wash. 


Consuliing ond Advisory Editors 


J. HARRY BLOHME 
LEWIS P. HOBART 
TIMOTHY L. PFLUEGER 
ELMER GREY 
CLARENCE A. TANTAU 
WM. Г. WOOLLETT 
JOHN J. DONOVAN 
JOHN BAKEWELL, JR. 
EDWIN L. SNYDER 
THOMAS J. KENT 
ALBERT F. ROLLER 

J. STEWART FAIRWEATHER 
JOHN W. GREGG 
RALPH D. CORNELL 
CHAS. H. CHENEY 

W. ADRIAN 

JULIAN C. MESIC 

H. J. BRUNNIER 

L. H. NISHEIAN 


Cover Picture 


Frontispiece 


II to I9 


20. 


26 
28 


35 to 40 
42 . 


46 


@ his Ossue 


SAN FRANCISCO SKYSCRAPERS 
А Posting by Edward Bruce 


ARIZONA END OF SUSPENSION BRIDGE, HOOVER DAM PROJECT, 
BOULDER CITY 
Etching by William Woollett 


TEXT 
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE AND SUBDIVISION 
Ralph D. Cornell, F.A.S.L..]. 
ARCHITECTURE SHANGHAIED 
Philip Clork Fisk 
MODERN EXTERIOR CONCEALS AGE OF OAKLAND BUILDING 
ARCHITECTS' VERSATILIT Y 
ART—IS IT 4 SCIENCE? 
William Lee Woollett, Architect 
VICISSITUDES OF 4 YOUNG ARCHITECT 
Elmer Grey, F.A.1.A. 


A TRIBUTE TO DR. STEINHOF 


` Wiljam Lee Woollett 
. CONCRETE CONTROL ENCOURAGED BY BUILDING CODES 


Homer M. Hodley, C.E. 


AUTOMATIC DRAFT CONTROL FOR SMALL BOILER PLANTS 
James К. Ferguson 


. WITH THE ARCHITECTS 


NEARLY TWO MILLION BARRELS OF CEMENT FOR GOLDEN GATE 
BRIDGE 


. CHAPTER AND CLUB MEETINGS 


PLATES AND ILLUSTRATIONS 


. THE WORK OF COOK, HALL & CORNELL, Lendscape Architects 


A Beverly Hills Street 
Air View ol Beverly Hills 
Lily Pond ia Public Park Plan, Monte Mar Vista 
General Plan of Beverly Hills Chula Vista Tract, Pasadena 


PRIVATE MAUSOLEUM FOR TRIXIE FRIGANZA 


Memorial Fountain in Carthay Center 
Los Angeles Administrative Center 


` Arnold Constable, Architect 


BLAKE BUILDING, OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 

BEN ALI DISTRICT SCHOOL, NORTH SACRAMENTO 

P. L. Drogon and С. R. Schmidts, Architects 

PORTFOLIO OF DRAWINGS BY JOHN GALEN HOWARD 

NATIVE HOUSES IN THE SOUTH SEA ISLANDS 

Photo by Elmer Grey 

LAYING CORNER STONE OF INTER STATE COMMERCE BUILDING, 


WASHINGTON, D. С. 
Arthur Brown, Jr., Architect 


Next GAtonth 


Three California architects have received Honorable Mention for designs 
submitted in the annual small house architectural competition conducted by 
the Better Homes in America. Pictures of the prize winning homes will 
accompany a special article by one of the officers of the organization that 
sponsored tbe contest. 

Elmer Grey's interesting series of articles on “The Vicissitudes of a 
Young Architect" will be continued, as will the series of drawings and 
sketches by the late Jobn Galen Howard. 


Published monthly by THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER, INC. 


W.J. L. KIERULFF, President and Monager 
New York Represcntotive—The Spencer Young Company, 299 Madison Ave., New York City 


1662 Russ Building, San Francisco, California 
FRED'K. W. JONES, Vice-President 


L. В. PENHORWOOD, Secretary 


Subscriptions—United States and Pan-American, $4.00 a year; single copy, $ .60. Canada and foreign countries, $6.00 a year 


—=——- 


сены и еее 2 


—— 


_ 


ARIZONA END OF SUSPENSION BRIDGE, HOOVER DAM 


PROJECT, BOULDER CITY 


ETCHING BY WILLIAM WOOLLETT 


ТНЕ 
ARCHITECT 
AND ENGINEER 


MARCH 1933 
VOLUME 112 
NUMBER THREE 


LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE AND SUBDIVISION 


2m profession of 


landscape architecture, itself young as 
compared with its allied professions, has 
developed as the result of a definite de- 
mand for specialized training not other- 
wise provided. This need for a new pro- 
fession gradually be- 
came apparent as it 
was recognized that 
the other professions 
did not, in them- 
selves, carry the va- 
rious projects of land 
development to their 
logical and ultimate 
conclusions of com- 
pleteness. Although 
the architectural de- 
signing of buildings 
might be skillfully 
handled to its last 
detail, the engineer- 
ing done with all the 
exactitude demand- 
ed of that profession 
and the planted 
shrubs and trees 
purchased from the 
finest stock obtain- 
able, there would 


BEVERLY HILLS, SHOWING UNIFORM 
TYPE OF STREET PLANNING 


by 
RALPH) В СОЛК ШЇ, РА Sie 


still be something lacking in the finished 
picture unless all the functional purposes 
and uses of the property had been well co- 
ordinated and unless it had all been done 
with as high a degree of aesthetic value as 
its economic and physical potentialities 
might permit. 

The profession of 
landscape architec- 
ture thus developed 
as the "art of fitting 
land to human use 
and enjoyment." 
This definition, so 
aptly expressed, is 
one officially accept- 
ed and given forth 
by the American 
Society of Land- 
scape Architects. In 
reality the landscape 
architect finds him- 
self in the position 
of one who must 
work appreciatively 
and understanding- 
ly with those of the 
different professions 
and trades, in a way 
properly to co-relate 


«uiu» 


== рецен 


ARIZONA END OF SUSPENSION BRIDGE, HOOVER DAM 


PROJECT, BOULDER CITY 
ETCHING BY WILLIAM WOOLLETT 


ТНЕ 
ARCHITECT 
AND ENGINEER 


MARCH 1933 
VOLUME 112 
NUMBER THREE 


LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE AND SUBDIVISION 


m profession of 


landscape architecture, itself voung as 
compared with its allied professions, has 
developed as the result of a definite de- 
mand for specialized training not other- 
wise provided. This need for a new pro- 
fession gradually be- 
came apparent as it 
was recognized that 
the other professions 
did not, in them- 
selves, carry the va- 
rious projects of land 
development to their 
logical and ultimate 
conclusions of com- 
pleteness. Although 
the architectural de- 
signing of buildings 
might be skillfully 
handled to its last 
detail, the engineer- 
ing done with all the 
exactitude demand- 
ed of that profession 
and the planted 
shrubs and trees 
purchased from the 
finest stock obtain- 
able, there would 


BEVERLY HILLS, SHOWING UNIFORM 
TYPE OF STREET PLANNING 


by 
RALPH D. CORNELL FASLA 


still be something lacking in the finished 
picture unless all the functional purposes 
and uses of the property had been well co- 
ordinated and unless it had all been done 
with as high a degree of aesthetic value as 
its economic and physical potentialities 
might permit. 

The profession of 
landscape architec- 
ture thus developed 
as the “art of fitting 
land to human use 
and enjoyment.” 
This definition, so 
aptly expressed, is 
one officially accept- 
ed and given forth 
by the American 
Society of Land- 
scape Architects. In 
reality the landscape 
architect finds him- 
self in the position 
of one who must 
work appreciatively 
and understanding- 
ly with those of the 
different professions 
and trades, in a way 
properly to co-relate 


4р 


the various elements that gointo the general 
landscape composition. He must be trained 
in aesthetics, in matters of composition and 
design, — but equally must he understand 
the practical problems of topography and 
engineering, of grading and roadbuilding, 
of irrigation and horticulture and the var- 


ж 


| 


| 


consideration for the ultimate use of the 
land with which he works. If it be a private 
estate that receives his attention he prob- 
ably will not be called upon to design the 
house or other main buildings; but he will 
be vitally interested in the design of such 
and must study the proper location of all 


GENERAL PLAN FOR BEVERLY HILLS, WHICH HAS BEEN CLOSELY 
FOLLOWED AS WILL BE NOTED BY REFERRING TO 

PHOTO ON OPPOSITE PAGE 

Wilbur David Cook, Landscape Architect 


ious types of construction that enter into 
the general field of landscape work. He 
works with ground forms, with plant mate- 
rials, with masonry and architectural struc- 
tures, He uses the sky as a backdrop, the 
sun as his spot-light and constructs the 
"set" to the best of his ability, external and 
personal limitations considered. 

The particular duty of the landscape 
architect thus becomes that of co-ordinat- 
ing the various elements that enter into 


buildings in their relationship to the effi- 
cient use of land and the general ground 
plan of the estate. He may not actually 
survey the property but he must understand 
topographical work and must know that it 
has been surveyed accurately. And he 
must, himself, be able to work from the 
topographical data. He must be able to 
establish proper grades and make specifi- 
cations for grading. He must be able to 
specify road construction, irrigation lines, 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 112) » MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


design offers a special lure to many. While 
the field of subdivision designing and plan- 
ning has called many landscape architects 
who find greater fascination in this work 
than in the other fields open to them. 

Of the specializations noted above, the 
of subdivision planning is the most closely 
allied to city planning. Most of our mod- 


bution to civic activities unless it has been 
thoughtfully studied and properly related 
to its entire environs. Thus. a subdivision 
unit within a city may serve purely residen- 
tial purposes for either private homes or 
apartment dwellings: or it may include with 
these the local business district to serve the 
neighborhood shopping needs. [t may be 


MEMORIAL FOUNTAIN IN CARTHAY CENTER, LOS ANGELES 
Cook, Hall & Cornell, Landscape Architects 


ern cities have probably developed, through 
the natural processes of growth, by the 
joining together and adding of subdivi- 
sions, planned and unplanned, one to an- 
other. The complete subdivision may be, 
in itself, a complete small city: or it may 
be merely one small piece in the jig-saw 
pattern that composes the larger metropol- 
itan area. This circumstance of scope and 
relationship to the larger area of the city 
is largely a matter of relativity. Whether 
the subdivision unit serves a very special- 
ized purpose or whether it is broad in its 
compass of urban uses and more or less 
includes a multitude of civic functions. it 
cannot be entirely successful in its contri- 


concerned solely with industrial usages. or 
it may be so large as to include all classes 
of urban occupancy and activity. But ex- 
cepting as these usages are studied in rela- 
tion to the larger city plan: excepting as 
traffic needs and facilities are studied and 
properly provided; excepting as proper 
recreational areas, parks and open air 
spaces are available, either within the sub- 
division itself or within properly accessible 
portions of the larger community plan. the 
individual subdivision cannot be thought of 
as entirely successful. These are reasons 
why the professions of landscape architec- 
ture and city planning have evolved into 
the important positions that they now hold 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER * 15 » MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


HHINHO HALLVeLLSINIAGV 
ALNNOD Аму ALIO SHIHONV SO'I AHL 
ЧОЧ мула TIVH ANV MOOD GHSIAHH AHL HO HALLOHdS?Hd 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER 4 16 ык MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


Вт: “істі Ауклыв 


CHULA VISTA TRACT, PASADENA—A SMALL, FOUR АСКЕ 
SUBDIVISION IN WHICH THE LOCATION OF TEN 
HOMESITES HAS BEEN STUDIED AND COMPOSED 


COOK, HALL 6 CORNELL, LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTS AND CITY PLANNERS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER Ы | 17 » MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


within the consciousness of civic growth 
and public welfare. And, further, they are 
reasons why subdivisions must not be plat- 
ted in stereotyped form of street pattern 
that considers nothing but the extension of 
existing streets, regardless of their use and 


PAONTES NAR VISTA 


business have proven beyond a doubt that 
there is sound economic value in attractive 
surroundings and that a city, that gives 
thought to such matters, not only is a more 
healthful and attractive place in which to 
live, but gains in economic returns from 


E 


` mn Р; РҮ * 
a Los ат 
ж. ‚„* % ry xe 4 
Mx ^ LN T NE Marre en ЙЛ Lo 98 D 
pou № at. jy Deu n je Qe «жаб ATF M я à 
FX V s ae 2 e ч T . 5” ы Ж 
EA m > ұма 
ег Е. Payu. E Е ^ 
“ж C € ES A a let 
* ^ pe - ҒЫ we 8 
жы a. М. = aye 
" 2,22 MEC NM 44 444. наз, 
ж. от 44% m 
2 "UT СЕЗ + aa? a 
d m. mu ^u aou oe” Mu 
/ ~ orate ee mage =? “мамығы т ат AS ie? 3^ De 2 o y 
/ ++ Gt деды ж.б ДӘ илдэ се эү» CIA SE Ses а аем жаз 2; E 
. EL UM PM M PA "егер er 
3 T 7 a аро тон лана 2G "ИЫ 
CMM ас МЕ 22-72 n к a E — и 
479 отр er =з тн Neo м. А 
5 T7 Ne кито мА COVATEY C, /Ъ TRO 
UE 


j, Ms «=, > 
cat] ee e eue cede LE 


MONTE MAR VISTA—A SUBDIVISION OF 130 ACRES WITHIN LOS ANGELES 
Note how well the road plan fits existing topography. 
Cook, Hall & Cornell, Landscape Architects and City Planners 


importance, and is concerned chiefly with 
the local, selfish interests of the moment. 
The subdivision of a given area to provide 
the largest possible number of lots does not 
necessarily make the greatest contribution 
to the community life or yield the largest 
financial returns to the subdivision pro- 
moter. 

The day when it is necessary to rise to 
the defense of beauty, as such, or to defend 
the need of active recreation and open air 
spaces has passed. The cold statistics of 


such beauty. There probably can be no 
more accurate a barometer of such values 
than the real estate promoter himself, who 
profits from the sale and development of 
property. And he has come to recognize, 
from his own experience, that land within 
an attractive and efficiently planned area 
will yield far greater actual returns than 
does a similar area within districts that 
have just grown without regard for the 
amenities of life. Mankind, today, is plac- 
ing a premium upon beauty in increasing 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 18 » MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


З сига ротара 


ЕЗГЕТТЕЕ! 
мыған ұлыма аг ача р арч адаа ж дар aig ұйым, 
ET жеө - сЕ 


= eee 


Li $e" 


M" mau аз. У 
EIE 


GEM 
ua messe meni mmo won 


D =. 
ЗГ. а .. 
б 


TW aes 
storsta» 
комы 


UFO росло сагу: 2; SOT 


«енен i нн / 
Em 


up P 


Ae aie ыы N © 


54 ж 
4 ахыюкарь но + 


REPE py ricum tnt tot elle — р 
4 н web с gpa a дааа s a X by 
$541 1 a 7 


. ge. 


Te тіс 2 
nae ^ 
АТА, уз 


CARTHAY CENTER, LOS ANGELES, COVERING 140 ACRES OF FLAT GROUND 
Cook, Hall & Cornell, Landscape Architects and City Planners 


degree, and none is quicker to realize this 
fact than he who is seling values to the 
public. " 


'The more tangible aspects of subdivision 
and city planning are more or less self evi- 
dent. With our modern tendencies and 
facilities for rapid transit and the annihila- 
tion of distance, it is not necessary that we 
argue for traffic provisions. But it is nec- 
essary that those responsible for the plan- 
ning of occupied areas be trained in the 
ways and means of providing these needs, 
and establishing the proper relationships 
between areas occupied for different 
usages. Residential and business districts 
must be readily accessible, one to another, 
without in any way encroaching upon each 
other in ways that may be detrimental to 
either. Different districts must have ade- 
quate means of communication with one an- 
other, the importance of this relationship 
varying with the amount and type of com- 
munication that goes on between them. 

During the nineteenth century the uni- 
versal tendency was for all business activi- 
ties tó centralize and then to expand from 
the focal point. Today the trend is toward 
decentralization in that local business cen- 
ters are springing up at varying distances 
from the original center, — this largely in 
response to the economic problem of traffic 


congestion in the centers of our cities. Thus 
the importance of proper study and plan- 
ning for these lesser subdivisions of the 
metropolitan districts, that they may func- 
tion adequately within themselves and yet 
relate conveniently and efficiently to the 
regional plan, places an increased respons- 
ibility upon those who determine their de- 
sign. The landscape architect and the city 
planner, of all professional men, seem bet- 
ter qualified through training and exper- 
ience to meet these needs than do those 
whose specialization has been along other 
lines. 


Editor's Note—This is the first of a series of four articles especially prepared for 
this magazine by members of tbe firm of Cook, Hall and Cornell, Landscape 
Architects, of Los Aogeles. The second article Бу Mr. Hall will be puhlished in 
May. Short biographical sketches of Messrs. Cook. Hall and Cornell follow: 

W. D. Coox: Born in Atlanta. Ga., 1869, received his early edncation in the 
public scbools of Boston, English Higb and Burdette Business College. Entered 
the employ of Olmsted Brothers, Landscape Architects in 1892, there being no 
schools of landscape architecture at that time. Past President of the Pacific Coast 
Chapter of the American Society of Laodscape Architects into which he was 
elected as a Fellow in 1910. 

СкоксЕ D. Нал: Born in San Antonio, Texas in 1877. Attended school at 
Smith Academy, St. Louis and St. Pauls School, Concord, N. H. Graduated Har- 
vard College in 1899, Studied landscape arcbitecture at the Massachusetts Insti- 
tute of Techoology. 1901-2, and Harvard University. 1902-3. Partner of Brett & 
Hall, Landscape Architects, Boston, Mass.. 1904-19, Member of Cook & Hall, 
1920-24. Member of Cook, Hall & Cornell, 1924 to date. Served on Executive 
Committee, Boston Chapter of the American Society of Landscane Architects and 
at present is on Executive Committee of Pacific Coast Chapter. Member of. Ameri- 
can City Planning Institute. Member Flintridge Golf Club and California Har- 
vard Club. Fellow oi the American Society of Landscape Architects. 

Елірн D. Cornett: Born in 1890 in Holdrege, Nebraska. Came to Cali- 
fornia іо 1908. After receiving Bachelor's degree at Pomona College took a three 
year graduate course at the Harvard School of Landscape Architecture, where re- 
ceived degree of Master in Landscape Architecture. This was followed by a year's 
practical experience with a prominent landscape firm in Toronto, Canada. Speot a 
year overseas in the infantry service with a comhat division. After armistice came 
to Los Angeles and opened office for professional practice. Member of the Hon- 
orary Fraternity of Phi Beta Kappa and a Fellow in the American Society of 
Landscape Architecture. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER я 19 » MARCH. NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


PRIVATE MAUSOLEUM FOR TRIXIE FRIGANZA, HOLLYWOOD 
ARNOLD CONSTABLE, ARCHITECT 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 20 [ч MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


ARCHITECTURE SHANGHAIED 


Being the experiences of a Los Angeles draughts- 
man seeking work and adventure while unemployed 


А. an architectural 


draftsman "out of work , unemployed, and 
with an excess of leisure on my hands I 
had decided to travel, and it was a grey, 
damp April morning that I had started to 
walk right by the gateman at the dock 
entrance. 

"Hey there, where' re you going?" 

"[d like to see the mate." I replied as 
carelessly as I could. 

“Which mate?" 

“Why, the first mate!" 

“All right, I guess you'll find him on 
board." And I breathed more easily. 

You see, I had decided to apply for the 
job of “wiper”, and the gateman was the 
only real hurdle. The ship was an ordi- 
nary freighter, with the usual amidship 
housing. four cargo hatches, and a gener- 
ous looking fo'castle aft. It was fairly 
small, and looked, in contrast to the bleak 
unemployment I would be leaving. terribly 
friendly. 


After a fifteen-minute search I found the 
first assistant engineer—my real quest, and 
after giving him eye for eye and convinc- 
ing him with a few vague answers (as only 
architects can do) to his questions, Ї was 
told to "turn to" the next morning. | 
thanked him with an “ОК” and went out 
on deck to sigh my success! [ was sailing 
to San Juan, La Guaira, Puerto Cabello. 
Maracaibo, and the Dutch West Indies, 
and I was to be paid for it! 


by 
PHILIP CLARK FISK 


For the first three days at sea I was in 
both a muscular and mental daze; muscular 
because of the dog's work 1 had to do (far 
different from pushing a pencil), and men- 
tal because of the relief from the financial 
condition I had just put behind me. 


Our cargo consisted mostly of wheat, but 
from there it branched amusingly to four 
crated Belgian hares with nervous noses, 
and three shiny new Chevrolet cars on 
their way to Puerto Cabello. The rabbits, 
and a race horse which we picked up at 
San Juan, remained on deck and were be- 
ing sent to none other than the President 
of Venezuela at Caracas. 


My job as “wiper” put me in close asso- 
ciation with the engine room, naturally, and 
at times I realized only too clearly (or is 
oily more apt?) that I was a member of the 
well-known "Black-gang '! 


The oiler with whom 1 had been en- 
trusted noticed one day that | was wearing 
a small ring on the little finger of mv left 
hand. He pointed to it and shook his head 
ominously. "It's like this," he said, talking 
loudly above the general noise of the 
engine room "you might be working close 
to an engine and just the small difference 
of that ring sticking out might catch your 
finger and take the whole hand right їп!” 
He made an ugly dive in the air with his 
hand. "Just like that!" 


Having, in accordance with my profes- 
sion, a high valuation on my hands, plus 
an inborn distrust of large expanses of 


running machinery, І knew that wherever 
I had to be working in that hot, oily en- 
gine room, [ would not voluntarily have a 
hand, or any other part of my anatomy in 
any such close proximity to the machinery. 
But the oiler insisted, "I'm telling ya, big 
boy, you d better take it off!" So to be true 
to the code of engine room ethics, I re- 
moved the ring. feeling a bit lost with the 
now nude little finger. 


We followed a course about thirteen 
degrees West of South from New York 
to San Juan which we entered one warm, 
foggy morning at six o'clock. The island's 
largest harbor swung in a huge arc around 
us, with mountains of small peaks rising 
into a mysterious looking inert mist. 


I went ashore, up the embarcadero to the 
town proper and plaza. What scale, de- 
tail, and color these builders had used in 
planning the mass of some church or semi- 
public building, and what charm was dis- 
played in the high ceilinged, balconied 
houses, with all their shuttered doors open 
to the breeze (and view)! We walked up 
many narrow streets to the top of the hill 
in back of the town, and from there gazed 
down upon the sea and a small colorful 
cemetery which nestles against one corner 
of the massive walls around old Morro 
Castle. We strolled past numerous 
goats browsing just off the road, and fol- 
lowed the curved narrow roadway down 
through a short vaulted tunnel which emp- 
tied us at the edge of the charming ceme- 
tery. Its simple little tombstones have writ- 
ten on them some of the most important 
names in Puerto Rican history, and in their 
modest, tasteful designs they form a most 
pleasant picture as they rest harmoniously 
in front of the deep blue background of the 
Atlantic. Most of the tombs are of a yel- 
low stone or marble and the whole scheme 
is watched over by a little circular chapel 
in the center. 


Two and a half days more at sea, and a 
silver-like dark line high in the clouds be- 
came more insistent as we sailed until I soon 
realized that we were approaching La Gua- 
ira, situated at the base of a mountain range 
which rises abruptly out of the sea to a 
height of ten or twelve thousand feet. La 


Guaira was founded in 1588, was destruc- 
tively sacked by filibusters about seven 
years later, and again by the French in 
1680. It is the most important harbor in 
Venezuela, being but twenty-three miles 
from Caracas, and in the vague form of an 
amphitheater it presents an inviting tableau 
as its small houses step gaily up the moun- 
tainside in assorted colors of soft tans, 
greens, blues, and off-whites. An old fort, 
painted green, commands a dominating 
view of all approaches to the harbor with 
an air of rather languid aggressiveness. As 
we half-aheaded” and "full asterned” into 
the tiny crowded harbor, formed largely by 
a breakwater, the noise of a busy little 
town came out to us — donkeys braying. 
streetcars and locomotives, the size of 
Fords, clanging and tooting, and natives 
chattering busily among themselves. The 
La Guaira I explored that night was gay 
and welcoming. Restaurants appeared to 
be scarce and at one in the morning its 
nearest relative seemed to be a small sort 
of push cart which vended appetizing bis- 
cuits filled with cheese, fish, onions, and 
whatnot. But we had been drinking beer 
for a matter of hours at the Bar del Com- 
mercio, and had been dancing with a vari- 
ety of gay leisured ladies of varying dusk- 
iness "up on the hill", and we were hungry. 


By day the town was warm and enervat- 
ing, but I managed to break away from 
the coolness of the bars and their beer long 
enough to investigate some of the hilly 
stepped streets and their architecture. А 
huge pair of wood doors of some twelve 
feet in height form the entrance motive to 
the house which stands as in European 
towns. directly on the street. The windows 
are also rather huge affairs and are invar- 
iably grilled with wood. The walls, exter- 
ior at least, are of stone or adobe and vary 
in thickness up to three feet, and are cov- 
ered with a fairly smooth hard plaster, 
painted. None of the window openings are 
glazed, but are merely filled with large 
panelled or louverd doors in pairs, and 
these usually swing inside the room to 
stand against the deep reveal caused by the 
wall thickness. I found several examples 
of entire walls formed of fixed louvers, 
though for the most part these did not 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E] 22 > MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


reach to the ceiling, but went up about ten 
feet as a more or less free standing parti- 
tions or screens, the louvers being from 
four to six inches wide and three-eighths 
to a half inch thick. Thus, cross ventilation 
is not stopped but goes on through the par- 
tition or wall. 


The Vice Consul explained to me that 
during some of the rather frequent blows 
the natives leave their doors and windows 
open and allow the air to pass through, 
thereby insuring in some measure the pres- 
ence of the roof after the blow has finished. 
The roofs are made of a cheap sun-dried 
tile and will not resist the heavy foot of 
an ordinary workman. When any roofing 
or roof-repairing is to be done, it is always 
executed by a skilled native workman with 
a catlike tread. 


Wood in this region is subject to the 
daily menu of the small white ant and is 
therefore used sparingly. И is used, how- 
ever, for structural purposes such as beams 
and rafters, and for door and window 
openings. 


Although the predominating exterior 
color is a sort of burnt yellow with plaster 
moldings painted white, other colors are 
used; a greyed pink, white, a dull blue- 
grey, various shades of blue-green and tan. 
Color is rarely used in the interior except 
for the dado or perhaps for a bit of decora- 
tion in the entrance hall, directly off the 
street. Many houses in Maracaibo have 
decorative designs in tile in the entrance 
halls. The straightforward simplicity of 
the houses, their high ceilings of eighteen 
feet or more, and the ever present court 
give them a feeling of happy spaciousness. 
In the larger houses thecourt takes the form 
of a square with a wide balcony around 
all four sides, having a stairway to it from 
the court. The balcony, in turn, forms a 
loggia around the ground floor of the court, 
and in most of the grander courts classic 
detail has been used in the form of the 
Ionic order for the ground floor and a small 
order of Doric collonettes, perhaps fluted, 
on the balcony, supporting a roof. The 
"Casa de la Mejor” in La Guaira is a fine 
example of this combination. 


I encountered a difficult and annoying 
problem in thinking that I could send some 
postcards back to the "States". The pre- 
vailing system is to sell stamps at one end 
of town and to mail them at the opposite 
end, and after having accumulated two or 
three strange sets of directions from nat- 
ives, І decided against any attempt at com- 
municating with my friends. Apparently 
this rule holds true throughout Venezuela 
for | had the same problem in Puerto Ca- 
bello, our next port. 


With the added distinction of having the 
national navy yards and drydocks for a 
background, Puerto Cabello is the second 
principal port of Venezuela. А bright little 
fighting cruiser lay at anchor as we entered 
the harbor. It was very white, and immacu- 
late, and thoroughly out of date. It had 
been purchased, I was told, from the 
United States many years ago. 


Curacao, clean and colorfully Dutch, 
was our next port of call, and the harbor 
of St. Anna, narrow and canal-like, cuts 
the town of Willemstad from its neighbor- 
ing suburb. The entire scene is delightful; 
the small houses and commercial buildings 
in the Amsterdam style give a gay string 
of roof lines, and various groups of white 
schooners which cruise the Carribean lie 
quietly against the docks, their sails furled 
and canvas stretched tautly over the 
decks as protection from the sun. Their 
cargoes interested us, for more than one 
fortune in Curacao has received its first 
impetus from the romantic source of smug- 
gling, there being no tariff on most articles. 
Cigarettes of American make can be bought 
for 1.10 a carton, and perfume, jewelry, 
etc., are all correspondingly cheap. These 
same articles are taxed highly in Venezu- 
ela, thus making smuggling an attractive 
vocation, if one cares to go in for that sort 
of thing! 


As an official language, Dutch is used. 
but the island natives resort to what is 
known as “Рараішепо”, a combination of 
Spanish, Dutch, English. and native words. 
Curacao, like Maracaibo, has boomed 
through the ой developments in Venezuela, 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ET 23 » MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


and near Willemstad is one of the largest 
refineries in the world. 


Louvers are numerous here as in Ven- 
ezuela, but the door and window openings 
are designed on a much smaller scale. 
Quaintness and style are here more the 
keynote than the grandiose spaciousness 
of the Venezuelan house. The Dutch have 
taken great delight in using the traditional 
motives of Amsterdam, and gable molds 
painted white, do gay tricks in combina- 
tions of curves, volutes, cyma-reversas, and 
straight lines. The use of the dormer for 
residences is typical, and chunky little sec- 
ond and third story colonnades and arches 
are frequently motivated in many of the 
more commercial structures. 


Maracaibo, lying in lazy horizontal 
stretches around its harbor is greatly in 
debt to the petroleum boom for its growth 
and prosperity. The shallow channel at 
the entrance to the bay permits only ves- 
sels having no more than a twelve foot 
draft, but tankers especially designed for 
this voyage, and many schooners plying 
their trades, licit and illicit, between the 
islands of the Carribean, make this har- 
bor their home port. 


In Maracaibo, as in La Guaira and 
Puerto Cabello, the court forms the archi- 
tectural key to the house plan, and from 
the street many of these сап be seen through 
the large entrance doors that are usually 
standing open. 


The market, the parks and the theater, 
are the pride of the city. The bordering 
edge of the huge steel frame market which 
occupies an entire block, is composed of 
little shops, selling clothes, shoes, and vari- 
ous sundries and foods, while the high 
arched interior contains fish and meat 
shops and vegetable stalls, none of which 
are overly sanitary. The famous city plaza 
is raised about three feet from the street 
and the walks which bound it and cross at 
diagonals, are of colorful glazed tile, the 
whole presenting a lovely terraced plane of 
verdure. 


Maracaibo, in addition to being a petrol- 
eum centre, has one of the country's larg- 
est breweries, and "Cervesa Zulia", named 
after the state of Zulia, retails in this agree- 
able city at four cents a glass. А boon to 
depleted architects! 


We dallied five days, wandering through 
the narrow streets at night, escaping the 
scorching sun by day, and more than once 
we envied the scrawny ill-sandled peddler 
who sat astride his equally scrawny don- 
key, flicking his ribs with a light stick to 
insure progress. But it was soon all be- 
hind us, as we climbed the ship's ladder 
for the last time. After the third mate had 
finished roaring “Carajo” at the poor native 
stevedores, and our lines had been hauled 
aboard, we headed out toward the Carri- 
bean once more, leaving Maracaibo in our 
broad wake astern. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E: | 24 » MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


MODERN EXTERIOR CONCEALS TRUE AGE OF 


OAKLAND BUILDING 


IDE... has taken 


the initiative in the Northern and Central 
California movement to modernize. Three 
undertakings of this type have recently 
been completed, one of which, the Blake 
Block, is described and illustrated here. 


The accompanying photographs show 
the building. before and after the modern- 
ization work which was completed last fall. 
The Blake Block occupies a site 150x100 
feet, on the southwest corner of Twelfth 
and Washington Streets. It was built in 
1890 and was remodeled in 1912, when the 
ground floor store fronts and the interior 
of the office floors were modernized. The 
exterior of the upper stories, with the bay 
windows, remained as originally built. The 
recent modernization included the remov- 
ing of these bay windows and the refacing 
of the upper stories. 


The building is owned by the M. K. 
Blake Estate Company, of which H. R. 
Havens is president. Mr. Havens insti- 
gated the modernization just completed and 
the work was done under his personal 
supervision. 


The contract for the work was signed 
on July 28. Work was started August 15 
and was completed October 1. The M. K. 
Blake Estate Company was readily grant- 
ed the permission of the qround floor and 
office tenants to make these alterations. 
with the understanding that the work 
would be completed by October 1. There- 
fore, a time bond was given by the con- 
tractor, who agreed also that the actual 
work of modernization was not to be 


started until all tile, window frames and 
sash, lumber (cut, stained and painted) 
and all other building materials were actu- 
ally on the premises. 


To effect the changes shown in the con- 
trasting photographs, all bay windows, 
cornices, projecting mouldings and orna- 
mentations were removed. Structural 
changes were taken care of as required 
and a new exterior finish of American en- 
caustic tile, in selected colors, was applied 
to the brick walls. The tile with black trim, 
is tan. The ornamental designs are of black, 
dark brown, old rose and light brown. 


In the interior, new linoleum and new 
lighting fixtures were installed throughout 
the building and all woodwork was refin- 
ished. The building lobby was completely 
modernized and a new marquis placed 
above the entrance. The old entrance was 
of white marble. The new one is of black 
marble with a terrazo floor in black and tan. 

All tenants of outside offices remained 
in occupancy during the period of altera- 
tion. An arrangement of temporary parti- 
tions was created, so that the work of 
changing the windows and making the 
other necessary improvements could be 
done without interfering with the office 
occupants. 


These temporary partitions, of full height 
and length, were installed across the fronts 
of all offices affected, before the bay win- 
dows were removed. Some of the old win- 
dows were installed in the partitioning to 
give the offices light and air. A space of 
21 inches was left between the outside 


< 25 > 


В: 
Алфи 
C, 
T! 


ELO oul — 


BLAKE BUILDING, OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 


Photo taken before alterations. 


e. 


- E — 


Courtesy Buildings aud Building Management BLAKE BUILDING, OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 
Photo taken after modernization. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 26 - МАВСН, МІМЕТЕЕМ ТНІНТҮ-ТНВЕЕ 


walls and the temporary partitions so that 
workmen could proceed without interfering 
with the tenants. The work in each office 
was all completed, varnished, painted and 
so on, before the temporary partition was 
removed. 

The plan worked out extremely well and 
the tenants have expressed themselves as 
pleased—before, during and after the mod- 
ernization. 

With reference to the benefits derived 
from the improvements, Mildred F. Eng- 
elke, writes in Buildings and Building 
Management, as follows: 

"It is difficult to evaluate the exact effect 
of the modernization upon our tenants. 
Many of them maintain branch offices of 
wholesale firms and have been located in 
the building for many years. Our profes- 
sional tenants also have been with us for 
from 12 to 20 years. They all state that 
their patients are well pleased with the 
modernization and this is, of course, an im- 
portant consideration. 

"It seems safe to say, however, that the 
results of the modernization have been ex- 
tremely beneficial, not only for the build- 
ing itself, but from the standpoint of the 
surrounding properties and for the down- 
town district of Oakland, in general. А 
number of people have expressed the opin- 
ion that doing this work during the depres- 
sion has been an excellent thing for the 
community, by providing employment for 
100 men, and the owners of the buildings 
have received many compliments. These, 
in turn, are naturally reflected in good-will 
toward the building." 


ARCHITECT'S VERSATILITY 

The daily press records that John Root, 
prominent Chicago architect, functions at 
times as a successful designer of women's 
gowns. 

Claude Bragdon, architect, mathemati- 
cian and author, has added to his reputa- 
tion by designing the successful stage set- 
tings for Walter Hampden's “Cyrano de 
Bergerac." 

Delano and Aldrich of New York have 
designed and sold successful doll houses. 
Young architects not now employed in their 


profession are selling through the Archi. 
tects Sales Bureau artistic leather goods. 
jewelry, radios, etc. 

There is plenty of precedent for all this 
in the active versatility of Renaissance ar- 
chitects. 

Michelangelo Buonarroti (1475-1564) 
was architect, sculptor, painter and poet. 

Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) was 
painter, sculptor, architect and engineer. 

Baldassare Peruzzi (1481-1556) was 
painter and architect, and coming down to 
the last century Carl Friedrich Schinkel 
(1781-1841) was architect, university pro- 
fessor, scenery designer and mural painter. 
For years Prussia maintained the Schinkel 
Museum in Charlottenburg. Now it is in- 
stalled on Unter den Linden.in Berlin in 
what was the Crown Prince's Palace. The 
extraordinary versatility of Schinkel is born 
in on a visitor to this museum when he sees 
the many photographs of executed work 
which include the Schauspielhaus and Das 
Alte Museum, models of buildings and en- 
gineering works, studies for frescoes and 
the scenery for classic plays. 

San Francisco architects are showing 
their versatility by applying themselves to 
various pursuits outside their profession. 
Several have turned salesmen, one is busy 
on a new patent, two have gone to ranch- 
ing and another is making etchings. Mr. 
Miller, formerly in Lewis Hobart's office, 
is making jig-saw puzzles. 

Е. Eugene Barton has designed a "dream 
kitchen" which the General Electric Com- 
pany has constructed on wheels for the 
convenience of prospective customers. 

Leonard Ford of Oakland is helping the 
"trade and barter" committee in Berkeley. 
His task is to find something two parties 
need, then arrange with them to pay for the 
articles in labor, instead of cash. 

John J. Donovan utilizes his spare time 
writing books on school architecture and 
perfecting his window patents. W. H. Rat- 
cliff, Jr., is in the banking business. 

So let not the architect be discouraged if 
his clients for building do not overcrowd 
his office at the moment. Let him broaden 
his horizon by interesting himself as did his 
predecessors in allied arts. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER <q 27 [ MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THRFE 


ААА w 
WA т | мм 


BEN ALI DISTRICT SCHOOL, NORTH SACRAMENTO, CALIFORNIA 
P. L. Dragon and C. R. Schmidts, Architects 


FLOOR PLAN 


ОЕ 


ol Ін A 
К | Kee 
= row тот, ЕЕЕ 22-2. 


PLAN, BEN ALI DISTRICT SCHOOL 
P. L. Dragon and C. R. Schmidts, Architects 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 28 e MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


ART —IS IT A SCIENCE? 


by 
Wm. LEE WOOLLETT 
Architect 


Foreword—It із a matter of common belief, so much so that it has become an axiom that Art criticism may properly 
come from those who are inexperienced in the practice of the arts. Is it not taken for granted that the artist is handi- 
capped for the role of critic? Is the lack of perspective due to the limitations of a particular. school of technique and the 
intensity of the artists gaze upon the work of his own hands of necessity a sufficient reason for this prejudice? 


The professional critic, the genius, who uses art as a fly-wheel for steadying the literary faculty, is the chief purveyor 
of knowledge about Art. It is true that this type of educator is unfettered by much impedimenta and can thercforc give 
free reign to the powers of analysis. Moreover it is pointed out that criticism is an art in itself requiring a specialist's train- 
ing and talent, and is a life work even as the work of the artist. 


Writers of towering literary eminence frequently include Art in their repertoire. The faculty for analysis and research, 
the Наш for generalization, often constitutes the sole basis for this so-called “Art Criticism." From the standpoint of the 
artist, conclusions based on mere observations about Art and artists is thin nourishment. Perhaps no form of critical lit- 
erature is so prone to err as to technical accuracy as that of Art criticism. 


The language of Art seems to be as yet without a scientific nomenclature. For this reason the beginner, the searcher 
for truth, is frequently hard pressed to find a reasonable pathway through the labarinthian effusions of men who could not 
make a beautiful thing if they tricd. 


Illustrating this phase of criticism, Emerson in his єзза on Art, states that “Sculpture was the game of a rude and 
youthful people,” etc. The prudery of an age that denied the theater and the dance to the orthodox might explain this 
attitude towards sculpture. Certainly the attitude of Dr. R. A. Millikan, who, through his writings, has directed our atten- 
tion to the modern tendency toward organization and control of all of life's processcs, is a definite challenge to the realm 


of Art to get itself in order. 


RT criticism! The 
poetry and talk about Art and Artists is 
one thing, the method of thought which 
makes Art and Architecture possible, is an- 
other. Have you considered the Mexican 
who turns out a beautiful tile, the Javanese 
who produces a drawing, the ancient Chi- 
nese potter? These isolated persons create 
their “speck” of beauty utterly unconscious 
of the History of Art — unknown to Art 
criticism. 

Observation indicates that the basic 
truths necessary to the production of a 
thing of beauty are easily apprehended by 
simple-minded, rational people. 

These truths come out of the structure 
of the mind itself, and are.as natural to 
the unsophisticated as breath. Moreover, 


a heritage of many generations of culture 
is not a guarantee of ability to use crea- 
tively these obvious Art values. In fact 
whole epochs pass into oblivion without 
the spark of a creative Art appearing. 
Whenever the maker of beautiful things 
does appear on the scene, however, his 
work is in harmony with every other beau- 
tiful thing created. 


What is the nature of the law which 
unifies the entire realm of Art; hence the 
harmony which enables the isolated student 
to function as a “teacher of Art" which 
empowers even the so-called barbarian to 
create new objects of beauty? 


Is it because Art is a science—an exact 
science? Contrary to popular belief, has 
Art fixed and immutable laws. a scientific 
and mathematical basis? Is it possible to 


d 5 р 


show a sequence of historical data and 
background which enables the statement of 
the laws governing the creation of Art on 
a purely empirical basis? 

When the earth was growing and nature 
had not as yet laid down its re-current lay- 
ers, was there a so-called science of Geol- 
ogy, any hypothesis of world evolution, or 
could there be until sufficient of life's pro- 
cesses had asserted themselves and left be- 
hind a relique of events? So with Art, man- 
kind has now achieved the rise and fall of 
many civilizations, the creation and cul- 
mination of many diverse aspects of the 
Art impulse. There exists now undisputed 
evidence that the Art activities of mankind 
have been recorded in the adamantine rock 
of man's mental structure. In the psycho- 
logical man we are able to trace the laws 
of Art; to establish an orderly knowledge 
of the meets and bounds of man's power in 
Art; and, above all, to create a scientific 
attitude toward the study of Art. 


Is Art more or less than a method of 
thought? Is it not in its finalty man's most 
advanced reflex to his environment, the 
capstone of his attitude toward his objec- 
tive world, an effort to create symbols of 
the realities of the subjective world, in 
which his real life moves and has it's being? 
As the poet says: "Since I am convinced 
that reality is not real, how shall I admit 
that dreams are dreams?" 


We live in an age of science, or imagine 
we do. How shall we know that dreams 
are dreams? This so-called world of sci- 
ence is a changing kaledescopic kind of 
world. A recent re-subdivision of the atom, 
a new concept of space, a fresh angle on 
the theory of light, and this stable thing 
we call "scientific" knowledge comes tumb- 
ling down over our head; and a new con- 
cept of what the universe is and how it 
functions must be re-erected out of en- 
tirely new elements. On the other hand 
Art, and the mind of man, synchronously 
created, are ordered forever on the un- 
changing principles of abstract truth. Keats 
said, "Beauty is truth — truth beauty." 
Truth is the kernel or atom; and the entire 
fabric of Art may be built up out of this 
atom without fear that the atom may be 


re-subdivided or the concept of truth 
changed. 


The challenge of the ages rides in the 
saddle of truth. There is no spectre of 
defeat, nor fall for this rider. As sure as 
the march of fate itself, the evolution of 
Art and the evolution of man's mind go on 
— side by side—each a complement of the 
other. To say which comes first is to say 
—the chicken or the egg?—-accomplishment 
in the realm of Art on the one hand, and 
the mental structure of man on the other. 
Therefore these are at once complement- 
ary and supplementary to each other. The 
knowledge of this duality is one of the tools 
of creation; instinct in man. To express 
this idea is to become a part of the creative 
force of which Art is the illustration. This 
thought also is in the nature of an enabl- 
ing act, making possible a station point, 
from which life processes may be viewed 
through portals of understanding. 


To so state thought fundamentals about 
Art and Architecture that the full logical 
structure of the scientific formulae is appar- 
ent, and to so state these truths that the 
grand rhythm of our entire complex civil- 
ization as well is included in the picture, 
is a reasonable though difficult task. Does 
the enormous diversity and complexity of 
our modern world present itself as an ob- 
stacle to the consummation of such an 
object? 

A vision of the world going in and out 
of small pigeon holes—each individual be- 
ing occupied with his own sphere of knowl- 
edge only, no man knowing the other man's 
work or play—no co-ordination of the var- 
ious ologies and sciences — по common 
ground of understanding—is the vision of 
Babylon; and life is a terrifying and mvs- 
terious tangle to him “who knows not that 
he knows not." Art. however, may be found 
to be the unifying factor, the common de- 
nominator of mankind, which enables man 
to function in the maelstrom of objectivity. 


Conceptions of the unity of our civiliza- 
tion are obviously quite impossible with- 
out a recognization of Art values. More- 
over, only out of an experience with divers- 
ity may we approach an understanding of 
unity. In order to interpret in terms of 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E] 30 > MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


Art the civilization of which we are a part 
it is necessary to systematize, organize, and 
unify our concept of all of life's processes. 
Any cogent system, therefore, relating to 
Art's truths must justify itself by being a 
coherent part of a universal system, and 
should, as well, appeal to the ordinary in- 
telligence. The system must be a practical, 
workable hypothesis, since our avowed 
purpose is to gain a concrete knowledge 
of the laws of production in Art. The 
answer should be found in the statement 
of the problem, and not at the end of the 
book. 


The problem of growing into a proper 
conception of Art is something like form- 
ing an opinion of the value of a diamond. 
You turn the many facets to the eye; now 
the diamond is yellow. now blue. Each 
turn presents another light; each added hue 
of color, another concept of the whole. 
Without the ability to hold in one's mind 
the varying moods of the diamond's char- 
acteristics there could be no final appraisal 
of its worth. 


The concept of Art as having a scientific 
formula is in that respect like any other 
science, in that we have merely a working 
hypothesis. In the case of Art, however, 
there is not the possibility of the "atom" 
being changed; abstract values remain. 


Illustrating the use of abstract ideas in 
the appraisal of Art values let us compare 
two buildings, which on the objective plane 
are quite unlike—the Parthenon and the 
Pantheon. Ordinarily one would say, 
"Why try to compare thinqs so unsuited 
to comparison, so incomparable? The struc- 
ture of the Pantheon consists of a struc- 
tural core plus an ornamental covering— 
concrete within; brick, plaster, stone, and 
marble on the surfaces, inside and out. The 
Parthenon is quite different in the principle 
of its construction. This building is of one 
material throughout. Marble blocks which 
form at once the core of the wall and the 
surface treatment. Which of the two build- 
ings gives out most an idea of permanence, 
of stability, of being a monument, other 
things considered? The abstract values, of 
permanence and stability, the chief char- 
acteristics of a monument in this case pro- 


vide an accepted means for comparison of 
the buildings in question. 

We have compared buildings here which 
are premiere in their class and of the same 
general type, and similar in function. It 
would be still more difficult to compare two 
buildings which were quite unlike in func- 
tion and of a different type. For instance, 
how very peculiar to seek a comparison 
between the Brooklyn Bridge and the Pyr- 
amids? This would be an interesting and 
amusing topic however, as illusive abstract 
values involving kinetic elements as op- 
posed to static elements, would be in the 
balance. 


It is obvious therefore that by bringing 
into apposition the abstract values a brisk 
fire of controversy is possible in regard to 
the correspondence of such diverse struc- 
tures as the Pyramids and the Brooklyn 
Bridge. However, one cannot say or even 
entertain the question which of the two 
edifices, the Pyramids or the Brooklyn 
Bridge. is the best composition, the most 
suitable to its practical purpose, or the most 
pleasing in structure or the most beautiful. 
This simple illustration at once discloses 
how meager ideas of Art must be if unat- 
tached to a scientific formula. 


The assumption that Art is a science is 
an affront to the Artist who does not know 
what and how he produces the beautiful. 
А few artists are naive children who imag- 
ine that they are sons of the gods, that gen- 
ius is above criticism, and that to probe into 
the whys and wherefores is a sacrilege. 
Such an attitude tends to clog all roads 
leading to an understanding of Art. 


However, more often the Artist is a 
thoughtful, logical person, who has in- 
vestigated the methods of his own mind 
and has organized that mind into a working 
tool. А very simple formula or even rule 
of thumb is sufficient to enable the produc- 
tion of very beautiful and complex artistry. 
Have you ever seen the carved patterns on 
the paddles of the South Sea Islanders? 
Do you remember the "Nude Coming 
Down the Stairway.” by Duchamp? 


Formulae and rule of thumb methods are 
but crystalized craftsmanship, which, like 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER «sii 31 p MARCII, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


the nomenclatures of Art and Architecture, 
constitute a library or store of criteria by 
which we may discover the psychology of 
Art. These findings in turn are useful in 
developing the underlying current philoso- 
phies of Art. 


Confining our allusion to Architecture, 
бог the moment— composition,” “sincerity 
of construction,” "appropriate material," 
"circulation," "function," "plan and eleva- 
tion in accord," etc., etc., are some of the 
expressions one finds on the lips of instruc- 
tors in the Art of Architecture. These seem 
to indicate a practical, fact-finding attitude, 
the center of interest being the objective 
phase of the subject, with very little em- 
phasis placed on the abstract values. 
"Unity, is deemed to be the greatest 
slogan of them all, and yet how shall we 
apprehend this unity? 


The scattered or pigeon hole education, 
of which we are at once the victims and the 
beneficiaries, has not as yet produced'a 
nomenclature of the sub-conscious and ab- 
stract values. 


А yearning for a vision of the whole, a 
desire for some basic principle which would 
be useful as a measuring stick, a demand 
to know Art and Architecture as a part of 
the universal harmony, and a desire that 
all nomenclature and craft be in accord 
with the simple categories of the mind, evi- 
dences a scientific attitude. 


The scientific attitude demands above all 
else a sense of unity. А sense of unity, as 
already indicated, can only come out of 
an understanding of diversity. Art and 
Architecture! plus the great world of me- 
chanics, of chemistry, of physics, of psy- 
chology, of biology. etc.: of the new move- 
ments in Art, Music, Literature, etc.! These 
forces, out of which are continually appear- 
ing "New World" symbols, have a repre- 
sentation in the categories of Art by virtue 
of our appreciation of the abstract values. 
Therefore through these abstract values we 
may know all life, and Art may be known 
in harmony therewith. 


Is this an apparently impossible thesis? 
How indeed shall the whale swallow the 
sea in which it swims? How shall the study 
of Architecture include the study of all con- 


tributary forces? May the answer be, "The 
road which leads to the impossible is the 
road which leads to understanding?" 


Modern civilization has developed a sys- 
tem of thought peculiarly its own. The note 
of unity which we demand as between Art 
and the other activities of mankind must 
be sought more particularly in the abstract 
values and the symbols we find in this sys- 
tem of thought. Painting and Sculpture, 
Music and Literature of today will be great 
comparably, as works of Phidias and 
Shakespeare were great; when the modern 
Artist has digested the civilization in which 
he lives, when he is able to give expression 
to his idea in terms of the abstractions 
which dominate modern thought, when in- 
cidentally he can divest himself of his con- 
cept of separateness. He must interpret 
life, all of life, to his contemporaries in 
terms of which they themselves are a part. 
The system of thought which is now the 
vogue, is like our language, a changing 
growing nomenclature of abstract values. 


To illustrate: in the theory of limits, the 
calculus presents a phase of thought. One 
might dignify the mathematical slant or 
asoect with the term "method." The meth- 
ods for finding the unknown quantities, the 
methods of arriving at answers involving 
variables, the concept of the uses of the 
zero and infinity, the idea of series, of pro- 
gression, of the fourth dimension, are part 
of this method. We have herewith a mech- 
anism of thought which has become a part 
of our civilization and represents a phase 
which may not be neglected in an appraisal 
of the abstract values which may be ex- 
pressed in Art and Architecture. 


Appraising influences to which the race 
has been subjected from an entirely differ- 
ent angle, consider the influences of the 
great Teacher, Jesus. Also that out of the 
stress of the Dark Ages and the Reforma- 
tion, out of the rise of popular government, 
and the scientific attitude toward research, 


(See Dr. R. Millikan) there have been 


born new and vital symbols. 


The "Red Cross” is one of the symbols 
in which is crystalized the meaning of our 
modern civilization; it has become a symbol 
of power, and of unity and divinity, of effi- 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 32 > MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


ciency. of humanitarism: a serene fixed star 
of service. The love of speed has evolved 
another symbol, or better, a series of sym- 
bols. Lindbergh is a symbol of this series. 
as is the Graf and the aeroplane. 


Illustrating the use of a modern symbol, 
the figure of aspiration, by the author, cre- 
ated as a symbol of the contest between 
good and evil, the higher and the lower, 
the slow and the swift—a combination of 
a snail and a deer—might have been made 
at any time in the past. At no time could 
it have the significance that it has today, 
when the concepts of growth and change, 
і.е., the Darwinian idea of evolution has 
become part of man's mental equipment. 
The science of biology alone as a back- 
ground for this symbol adds a significant 
meaning. 


As in a Persian rug, or a medieval tap- 
estry, or a Bach fugue, it is of course desir- 
able to know the theme in order to enjoy 
the movement and significance of values 
in symbols of this character. The objective 
form is but an echo or mirrowed figure of 
the real which is created in the subcon- 
scious, and the problem of modern Art is 
to know the law and express this reality of 
the sub-conscious through a rational pro- 
cess. 


What did Emerson mean then when he 
said that sculpture was “the game or a rude 
and youthful people, and not the тап!” 
labor of a wise and spiritual nation?” Did 
he miss the abstract values of the ancient 
Art that sculpture is a game for hands 
nicely tuned to subtle values and percen- 
tions alert to the powers inherent in the 
subconscious? Perhaps. probably so; but 
even if this be true, his meaning might have 
been aside from considerations of mere Art 
interpretation. Would it be difficult from 
a modern point of view to prove that Emer- 
son was right in his estimate of Greek 
sculpture? 


Emerson believed with us that man is 
on his way from lesser to greater thinqs. 
As we have noted, man's primary impulse 
is to repeat agreeable sensations. This ргіп- 
ciple is one of the "leading strings” of the 
Almighty. 'Think if you will of the first 
few moments, days. weeks, of life given to 


man, to nestle in soft warm places, to take 
pleasing and refreshing drink; the first 
chapter, to wallow in the luxury of father 
and mother love through childhood days, 
the next; then the rod chapter, and after 
a little while to scamper forth into the 
world to get a taste and repeat the dose. 
This is the modus operandi through life- 
learning by experience to be sure; sensing 
the sour, but preferring the sweet. 


Long before humanity had registered the 
pains and joys of the vicarious ideals, i.e., 
as expressed by an Emersonian philosophy, 
man put his unshod feet on the pathway of 
aesthetics; and, thrusting boldly out into 
the wilderness of desire, discovered by 
means of tragedy and comedy the realm of 
abstract beauty. The vision pleased him 
well; the history of Art is the record of 
the vision. 


Since the time of the Greeks and Egyp- 
tians when first the full blown flower of 
beauty in Art sent forth its fragrance, man 
has grown. Each epoch since has witnessed 
accretions of experience and knowledge. 
after the rise and fall of Rome the dull fear 
of the Dark Ages must needs be registered. 
The cowl of Martin Luther thrown back 
from brave eyes, reminds us of the ever 
ascending levels of man's mental integrity. 
Треп the caravans coming down into 
Egypt, and ships laden for Venice, Genoa, 
and Ceylon evisage a tide of merchandis- 
ing which destined to girdle the globe with 
products of mart, heralded a new moral 
code. The credits, confidences, and re- 
sponsibilities of a world commerce presage 
the emergence of a world consciousness. In 
conseauence the idea of “а citizen of the 
world” is here. 

Incidental to the growing pains and 
maturing struggles of the race. two main 
tap-roots have thrust down into the sub- 
conscious, one the search for the beautiful, 
for which man's impulse to pleasurable sen- 
sation is responsible. The other is the great 
tap-root of man's spiritual life, the "white 
man's burden," i.e., the sense of responsi- 
bility. This sense of responsibility the nat- 
ural outcome of the necessity to provide, is 
the obvious opposite member of the couple 
—Ац and the practical, these two. It is 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 33 > MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


this easily recognized apposition which is 
in part responsible for the accepted atti- 
tude that Art is “unscientific.” Art is play, 
commerce is work, or in other words, play 
is what you want to do, and work what you 
are obliged to do. 

The objective counterpart of the idea of 
responsibility is found in the co-ordinate 
and consolidated business structure of the 
day. This structure, which is built up on 
"confidence" or the inter-responsibility of 
man, is the cornice line of achievement of 
our epoch. This complicated and delicate- 
ly adjusted conglomerate of diversified in- 
terests is welded together by means of an 
altogether different thought than which has 
held sway heretofor. The modern thought 
is a symbol of vicarious suffering and serv- 
ice. 

Therefore looking at life in the large, Art 
and Architecture are deemed to be on the 
rim rather than at the center; is one of the 
purely incidental developments and enrich- 
ments of man's character. The Art sense 
is a developed sense of play and achieves 
its ends in itself. That the sense for beauty 
and Art is one of man's earlier achieve- 
ments is evidenced by history. 

Therefore from Emerson's point of view, 
the Art instinct in man developed at the 


play stage of his existence. The commun- 
istic man, citizen of the world, is only just 
arriving on the scene. And being a later 
accomplishment; is it fair to assume that 
this new sense registers a high water mark 
of human development?; higher than the 
sense which apprehends merely beauty or 
form and color, as the sine quanon of ex- 
istence. Emerson viewed man in the large 
and naturally in comparison with the higher 
virtues and attainments, sculpture to him 
seemed irrelevant and immaterial to the 
success of a modern state. 


So much for the exalted philosophic 
point of view! However, when we con- 
sider that the mass of mankind has yet to 
pass the Rubicon of aesthetics, for who 
ever may enter the realm of exalted phil- 
osophy must truly apprehend the values in 
aesthetics. 


Viewed from the standpoint that aes- 
thetics must be accomplished before one 
can go on to higher things, sculpture be- 
comes a worthv achievement to those who 
otherwise would discount its value. On 


the other hand to him who has experienced 
sculpture, 1.е., the truths in aesthetics, it 
becomes to him "the game of a crude and 
youthful people." 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 34 ра MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


PROGRESS STUDY FOR A PUBLIC BUILDING DESIGN, 
PROJECT L'ECOLE DES BEAUX ARTS 


The Graphic Side ol 
: a Great Architect s 


Accomplishments 


supervising architect and head of the School of Architec- 
ture, University of California. These "school studies, 
with the exception of the above plate, were all “twelve- 
hour sketch” problems. 
Next month's series will continue the Paris drawings and 
include major projects. 


ln this portfolio is presented a series of drawings made at 
l'Ecole des Beaux Arts, by John Galen Howard, late 


Republication prohibited except by special permission of Mrs. John Galen Howard. 


< > р 


ізі, 
Р” FN. ыз +a 
x — mew | 
қ м TÉ. i í м 1 | 
- р LE i ES 4 


“А PRIMARY SCHOOL", A TWELVE HOUR SKETCH PROBLEM, 
L'ECOLE DES BEAUX ARTS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E] 36 » MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


"A LOGGIA", A TWELVE HOUR SKETCH PROBLEM 
L'ECOLE DES BEAUX ARTS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 37 » MARCH. NINETEEN THIRTY-TIIREE 


SLAY XnvHg8 SAA 410904.1 WHTHO?Hd HO.L33MS 
ЧПОН AATAML V ./'HIVNNO'IOO аму ONIGNVT .LVOS V.. 


Е 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 38 » MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


SLAY ХПУЯЧ SAC 3 1028.1 ‘NOILNAW аяачулау 
WGIHO?Hd HOISMNS YNOH AATAML V '.NOIIIAVd NAGY) у, 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER а 39 > MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


SKETCH PROBLEM "A CHURCH WARDEN'S PEW" 
L'ECOLE DES BEAUX ARTS 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER ^ 40 к MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


VICISSITUDES OF A YOUNG ARCHITECT 


by 
ELMER GHEY Е. А. А. 


Fifth of a Series of Reminiseent Sketches of 
Early Architectural Practice of the Author 


Dorne the first 


part of my association with Mr. Hunt my 
health again failed and I decided to take 
a trip to the South Sea Islands. I boarded 
the steamer Mariposa at San Francisco 
and the events which are related in this 
number, except for the substitution of other 
names for evident reasons, happened just 
as they are told. 


That they have not much to do with 
architecture as it is commonly considered 
must be admitted, but from another angle 
perhaps they do have a bearing. For the 
architect whose love of the beautiful does 
not extend beyond the boundaries of his 
own craft, into those, for instance, of fem- 
inine beauty, seems to me to be lacking in 
something rather important. | once knew 
one such who proudly proclaimed that he 
could not see a beautiful woman—consid- 
ered it rather a weakness to do so—and his 
architectural work showed it and was hard 
and angular as might be expected. He and 
some of the extremists of the present mod- 
ernistic school would have us believe that 
architectural beauty consists in expressing 
only the constructive bones of buildings: 


but there are plenty of us who are consti- 
tuted differently and who are not satisfied 
with mere bones—either in buildings or in 
women! We feel that architecture is just 
one of many different forms of beauty and 
that he who is not able to recognize and 
appreciate beauty of many kinds has just 
so much poorer chance of creating a kind 
of beauty in his own craft that will satisfy 
the majority of discriminating people. 


ALL ABOARD FOR THE ISLANDS. THE 
SMILING YOUTH IN THE NATTY OUTING 
SUIT IS ELMER GREY 


4 ub» 


NATIVE HOUSES IN THE SOUTH SEA ISLANDS 
Photo by Elmer Grey 


But to get back to the trip: —I had se- 
cured a letter of introduction to the captain 
of the steamer and presented it soon after 
getting aboard. As I entered his cabin he 
was standing in front of a desk upon which 
were scattered several opened letters. He 
remarked that he had received some other 
introductions from passengers and that 
they promised to give us very pleasant com- 
panionship on the journey. Then, by way 
of making conversation, he picked up one 
and said, "Here is one from a rear-admiral 
in the United States Navy, introducing a 
Mrs. Harry Jones who is a young and at- 
tractive widow, a daughter of John Hays 
Harris, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 
of Nevada. The rear-admiral writes, "Take 
good care of her and bring her safely back 
to San Francisco.’ I wonder what he means 
by that. Of course I will, so far as I am 
able to." He volunteered to see that I met 


her soon and shortly afterward brought 
about the introduction. 

She was slim of figure and delicately 
modeled like an exquisite piece of Dresden 
china—but also somewhat like china, her 
face had a peculiar pallor that made me 
wonder what caused it. She was interested 
in art, had at one time a studio in San Fran- 
cisco and we soon became fast friends. 


The second day out at about the noon 
hour we were standing together at the rail 
when the dinner gong sounded. She sighed 
and remarked, "Oh dear, there's that ter- 
rible dinner hour again." I was surprised 
because she had been given the honor of 
being placed next to the captain at his table. 
I asked whether she did not like his com- 
pany, to which she replied, “Yes, but it is 
a strain nevertheless." That made me even 
more curious and [ pressed her for further 
explanation which she seemed reluctant to 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER EI 42 » MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


give. Finally she declared that she found 
it difficult to keep up her end of the con- 
versation at the table. I was amazed. Here 
was a young woman whose father's posi- 
tion assured her every social advantage 
and yet who admitted difficulty in the ex- 
ercise of the very faculties which most 
women in that class pride themselves upon. 
I could not understand. 


"But tell me," I said, "You enjoy people 
and | know that you are equal to any imag- 
inable social situation. Why can you pos- 
sibly dread the dinner hour on such a de- 
lightful voyage as this?" 


She looked out over the water and was 
silent—and for a long time remained so. 


Then suddenly she turned and with a 
peculiarly sad look on her face said, “I will 
tell you why I feel as I do. Please keep 
it strictly to yourself. I am traveling with 
my sister as you know, and I told you that 
I was taking this trip for my health which 
is true—but it is only a part of the truth. 
I don't know why I am telling you this! 
Something seems to prompt me to do so. 
Some people smoke or drink to excess, but 
I—I—I have come to take a certain drug 
to excess! I haven't been taking it long. 
but it seems to be getting me! They are 
sending me on this trip as a cure, and they 
suppose that I have none of the stuff with 
me. But I have plenty hidden away in my 
trunk and before each meal I take a dose 
to brace me for the conversation at the 
table. Afterwards there is a terrible reac- 
tion and І have awful spells of melancholia. 
Between you and me I don't believe San 
Francisco will ever see me again! One of 
these days when one of these terrible spells 
is upon me [ shall be tempted to..... Oh. 
the sea would be better than such agony!” 


What could I say! We looked out upon 
the water and both were silent for many 
minutes. Finally, for want of a better thina 
to do, I placed my hand upon her arm and 
said, "We will be late for dinner. Let us 
90.” The next installment will tell of how 
this surprising announcement grew into a 
complicated and very tragic situation. 


( To be continued) 


A TRIBUTE TO DR. STEINHOF 


By Wm. L. WooLLETT 


Wik are ennobled by the greatest of all 
MB human playthings—art. When a mes- 
senger bearings news of art of a new age 


appears we treat him as we would some 
ambassador from the Court of Kings. 


When Dr. Steinhof was here in Los An- 
geles I could absorb only some of him at a 
time. One can remain in a great gallery 
only a little while. The stimulation is too 
great; and so 1 am looking forward to Dr. 
Steinhof's book. Quiet hours of meditation 
are stored there for the lover of beauty and 
the student of art. f 


Dr. Steinhof requires no “authentic” dis- 
sertation on analytical art subjects from his 
admirers. The public certainly does not 
need to be informed. But honor to whom 
honor—tribute to whom tribute. The stu- 
dents of art in this great country honor 
this man. And it is in the nature of hos- 
pitality to flavor the honors with appre- 
ciation of his peculiar personal charm. This 
gentleman of Vienna—who contributes the 
flexible easy charm so characteristic of his 
native city, puts over his psyche with sub- 
tlety and a mighty force. His personality 
speaks of much older civilizations. If you 
are a psycho-analyist, ог ап anthropolog- 
ist, you will, after one look at the skull for- 
mation of Dr. Steinhof, put him down as 
Rameses Il. 


I have a good friend, an architect, who 
always means Hans Holbein to me. My 
architect friend looks just like that splen- 
did old Dutchman. He is Dutch, and Dr. 
Steinhof makes me think of Rameses II. 
I am not so sure that I understand Dr. 
Steinhof's remarks about the sculptures of 
antiquity — they are etched on the back- 
ground of my hope. 


Dr. Steinhof asks us to appreciate art 
for the abstract values as we sense them, 
untrammeled by historic impediments and 
unfettered, save for our own illusions as 
to space sense and plastic terminology. | 
feel a little "unfinished" when I attempt to 
put Dr. Steinhof's philosophy into my own 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 43 » MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


words. It is like new wine in old bottles. 
However, I will go on. 

The plain fact is that Dr. Steinhof's work 
is so full of stimulous that there is no end 
to the effectiveness of his news. I find my- 
self writing an essay on the subject opened 
up by the first paragraph of his proposed 
book, to which I have referred in the early 
part of this paper:— "The idea which in- 
trigues me is the influence of the psychic 
method of historical research in art." I am 
quoting from memory, not the exact words. 
Personally, I like history. I think that a 
good historian should make a good artist. 
| like analysis, and I enjoy the way things 
are put together; but [ see as one sees 
through a glass—darkly—that there is a 
fundamental science of all things—quote 
Confucius — upon which the genius — the 
creative genius leans—when he steps down 
to the finite for a new world—for birth of 
a living creation. So the stand of Dr. Stein- 
hof for "Spontaneous creative deeds", em- 
pirically born of talent, fantasy and cour- 
age, relying on the fundamentals of the 
science to which they belong. is real to me 
—but real as a mirage is real. 

Since some are made to make spades and 
shovels, some must make delicate airs 
played on singing strings. The spade and 
shovel stage of art is the science of art— 
necessary. That is the stage which ] am 
trying to understand. Dr. Steinhof knows 
of himself intimately all of this background; 
the science of art is his without effort. His 


mind and spirit are free to express the il- 
lumitable spaces of the abstract. Therefore, 
he dwells upon this phase—the final phase 
—the quest of all art teaching. 

The psychological aspect of Dr. Eugene 
G. Steinhof of Vienna will be measured by 
the age toward which the future will be 
pointing—a golden age. "The golden Age 
of Pericles Reborn". Like painted ships 
upon a painted ocean. So to that coming 
age he comes as the unreal to the real —the 
temporal to the spiritual. In the Indian 
language of North America Dr. Steinholf 
would be called "Big Shot in the Desert”. 

Without a doubt the idea that Dr. Stein- 
hof is emphasizing in his lectures, and 
which will be elaborated in a book just 
about to go to press, will establish a new 
horizon in art education. 

А group of the foremost architects in 
New York City is endeavoring to per- 
suade Dr. Steinhof to found a school for 
the formation of his theories in art educa- 
tion. 

Dr. Steinhof came to the Coast under 
the auspices of the Carnegie Art Center. 
Most of his time was spent at the Univers- 
ity of Oregon. The outstanding work which 
he did at that point has been supplemented 
by a series of lectures given in the various 
universities of the Pacific slope. He has 
also lectured and taught practically 
throughout the civilized world, having just 
returned from a lengthy sojourn in South 
America. 


ni 
2, Fin. ч! 
RU И Ni 
MV: К ШИИ 

х xi M eue JN 


(4 
5 


SKETCH BY EDWIN L. SNYDER 


ENGINEERING 


AND BUILDING 


CONSTRUCTION 


CONCRETE CONTROL ENCOURAGED BY 


BUILDING CODES 


A portion of a me 


vised section of the building code for rein- 
forced-concrete construction by Portland, 
Ore., establishing two classes of concrete 
work, with corresponding values of work- 
ing stress, emphasizes this plan which has 
been in successful operation in Seattle for 
more than a decade. The purpose of the 
code provision is to allow safe working 
stresses for concrete mixed according to 
definite proportions with only nominal in- 
spection and to encourage better concrete 
practice, whenever economically feasible, 
by raising the allowable working stresses 
for concrete mixed with careful control of 
the wc ratio under continuous technical 
supervision. 

It is generally customary for building 
codes to provide but one class of concrete, 
with one set of working stresses. These 
stresses, of necessity, must apply to work 
that may be improperly done as well as to 
that which is controlled and carefully exe- 


*Mr. Hadley is regional structural engineer for tbe Portland Cement As- 
sociation. A new uniform building code is now under consideration in San 
Franciscn and the suggestion has been made that the Seattle and Portland 
Codes, with particular reference to concrete control, might be followed 
to a more or less extent. 


by 
Н. M. HADLEY * 


cuted; they must be average working 
stresses. Аз such they really penalize and 
offer no encouragement to good work. 
while at the same time they may be unduly 
liberal with respect to poor and careless 
work. There is no way to avoid this situa- 
tion with a single standard classification. 

Seattle, Wash., was the first city to 
adopt two classes of concrete based essen- 
tially on control and supervision. The 1921 
revision of its code followed closely the 
current Joint Committee recommendations, 
but it required the presence of a qualified 
concrete supervisor on all work employing 
the higher stresses, which were consider- 
ably above those previously allowed. Selec- 
tion of the supervisor could be made by 
the architect from a list of those who had 
successfully passed an examination for the 
position given by the building department. 
This inspector, paid by the owner, re- 
ported daily to the building department and 
could be removed for cause by the depart- 
ment. Testing of all materials entering into 
the work was also required. 

This type of concreting operations, in- 
cluding the services of a supervisor and the 
testing of materials, was not mandatory, 


45» 


however. If a job was small or, even in 
the case of a large job, if the owner pre- 
ferred not to incur the expense of super- 
vision and testing, he was free to proceed 
without what he might regard as unneces- 
sary restrictions. For such work, however, 
section 427 of the Seattle code states, "The 
ultimate strength of concrete not under ex- 
per supervision shall be assumed as 75 per 
cent of that given in the above table." This 
requirement results, of course, in heavier 
concrete sections and increased reinforce- 
ment in lieu of the more careful control and 
supervision. It is decidedly to the owner's 
interest in any work of magnitude, not only 
with respect to first cost but also with re- 
spect to the quality of the finished building. 
to have the concrete work supervised and 
to take advantage of the higher working 
stresses. The city, concerned with public 
safety, likewise is assured of a better qual- 
ity of work by this arrangement. 

The successful experience in Seattle in 

more than ten years’ use of this plan had 
its influence upon the new Portland code, 
section 208 of which states: 
"Reinforced concrete may be 
designed, mixed and proportioned in 
either one of two systems: one where 
the cement, sand and coarse aggregate 
are mixed in definite proportions such 
as 1-2-4 or 1-3-5, etc., meaning one 
part of Portland cement, two parts of 
sand and four parts of gravel, е{с.; or 
two, where the concrete пихта and 
placing is carefully supervised and 
with control of the ratio of the amount 
of water to the amount of cement 
used." 


The usual requirements and safeguards 
regarding materials, mixing, placing. etc., 
are set forth. However, for concrete on the 
basis of "definite proportions" no special 
inspection requirements are established bv 
the code. І 

For "water-cement ratio concrete and 
control," section 232 (a) recognizes two 
classes of this concrete: first, that which is 
based on established results with average 
materials customarily used in Portland: 
second, a class where special advance and 
preliminary tests are made on special mixes, 
and an increased amount of testing is done 


during the progress of the work. Both 
classes of this concrete require the contin- 
uous supervision of a qualified and experi- 
enced supervisor, 


NU "who shall be paid by the owner 
and shall work under the direction of 
the Bureau of Buildings the 
supervisor shall be a person thorough- 
ly qualified by training and experience 
in the theory and construction of rein- 
forced-concrete structures ..... (he 
shall) have direct control of all fac- 
tors, other than the design. which 
affect the strength of the concrete of 
the structure. 


“It shall be unlawful for any per- 
son to place any concrete in a struc- 
ture requiring supervision unless there 
be present a regularly appointed sup- 
ervisor. .... It shall be unlawful for a 
contractor to carry on his work ..... 
contrary to the instructions of the sup- 
ervisor. If the contractor fails to carry 
on his work in a proper manner, the 
supervisor shall order the work 
stopped." 


The table compares the principal per- 
mitted working stresses in sections 216 and 
236 of the new Portland code for a 1:6 
mix on the "definite proportions" basis 
without special supervision and for a 714- 


. 8 э 8 ù 


WORKING STRESSES ALLOWED BY NEW CODE 
(For concrete with ultimate strength of about 
2,000 Ib. per sq.in.) 
“W ate-Cement 
Ratio-Concrete 


“Definite and 
Proportions” Control” 
Lb. Per Lb. Per 
Steel Sq. In Sq. In. 
ео ыы 16,000 18,000 
Concrete 
Flexure—Compression .............. 650 800 


Flexure—Compression adjacent 


to про 750 900 
Shear 
--різіп concrete .. 40 40 
— punching Е 120 E 
—with web reinforcement and 
anchorage Юг longitudinal 
Steel. ЕТ sU m 180 
Bond 
= plain) Бал 80 80 
— deformed ОБЕ 100 100 
Axial compression 
— plain, rodded columns ............ 450 450 


—spiralled columns ...... ... ....... 


300 (0.10 + 4 p) Ес 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E 46 » MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


gal. w c concrete with supervision. These 
mixes may both be assumed to produce 
about 2,000-ІҺ. concrete. 

For a "definite proportions" concrete 
with a mix of 1:3 the working stresses are 
permitted to be increased 20 per cent, e.g., 
the 650 compressive stress would be in- 
creased to 780 Ibs. For a 6-gal. "w с ratio 
concrete," controlled and supervised, with 
approximate proportions of 1:4 and a 
strength of about 3,000 lb., the stresses 
given in the table would be increased 50 
per cent, e.g., the 800-Ib. compressive stress 
would be increased to 1,200 Ib. 

This evaluation of concrete construction 
on the basis of control and supervision ex- 


ercised is fundamentally sound and in ac- 
cordance with the principle that higher 
working stresses should be allowed on 
work that is carefully done. It provides 
encouragement and incentive for that kind 
of work. On the other hand, it is equally 
proper that work not as carefully controlled 
should be safeguarded by appropriately 
lower stresses and an increase in the quan- 
toties of materials. Just as inspection and 
grading marks establish degrees of quality 
in lumber or as label service assures qual- 
ity in insurance ratings, so does proper and 
adequate field inspection of concrete fur- 
nish a warranted basis for increased and 
higher working stresses. 


AUTOMATIC DRAFT CONTROL FOR SMALL 


BOILER PLANTS 


Ax interesting devel- 


opment has recently been perfected for the 
promotion of economical operation of gas- 
fired steam boiler installations wherever 
they are used for heating. It is a practical 
extension of the automatic control features 
which are peculiarly adaptable to the use 
of this fuel. 


During the past few years, considerable 
progress has been made in the design and 
development of efficient gas burning equip- 
ment so that at the present time there are 
several dependable makes of gas burners 
available. Until recently, however, the 
problem of automatically maintaining high 
combustion efficiency over a wide range of 
boiler loads had not been satisfactorily 
solved to the point where the average small 
boiler plant operator could justify the init- 
ial expense of the installation of automatic 
draft control. 


by 
JAMES R. FERGUSON 


The advantage of controlling the flow of 
gas to the gas burner under a steam boiler 
by means of a gas fuel regulator has now 
received widespread recognition and is 
practically standard practice. Gas fuel 
regulators are controlled by steam pres- 
sure. The actuating pressure connection to 
the diaphragm is taken from the steam 
header. While steam pressure remains be- 
low the pressure setting of the regulator, 
the valve is held full open by the tension 
of the long coil springs. If the steam pres- 
sure increases, it acts on the regulator dia- 
phragm to partly close the valve and cut 
down the fuel supply to the burner. 

The results obtained from gas fuel regu- 
lators have been eminently satisfactory and 
have answered every requirement for the 
service for which they were intended. To 
those interested in obtaining an even higher 
efficiency in the utilization of natural gas 
for boiler fuel, it has been increasingly 
apparent, however, that if it is sound prac- 
tice to control the flow of gas in accord- 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER <q 47 > MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


ance with steam pressure demands, some 
provision should also be made for accurate 
control of the flow of air. 

Any gas burner is, primarily, a mechan- 
ism for the admission and intimate mixture 
of air with the gas. Combustion efficiency 


DIAGRAM OF BOILER INSTALLATION, SHOWING 
AUTOMATIC DRAFT CONTROL EQUIPMENT 


depends upon the effectiveness of the burn- 
er in these two functions. Assuming com- 
plete combustion and correct heat applica- 
tion, overall boiler efficiency will be in pro- 
portion to the relation maintained between 
the air theoretically necessary for the com- 
bustion of the fuel and the amount actually 
admitted. 

In recognition of the importance of this 
fundamental principle, gas fuel and draft 
control should be so combined as to be cap- 
able of controlling the fuel and air in cor- 
rect proportion for any demand, at maxi- 
mum combustion efficiency. 

А simple and effective method of main- 
taining the correct proportions of air and 
gas, with resultant high combustion effi- 
ciency over a wide range of boiler loads, is 
indicated in the accompanying diagram. 

This system, which is ball bearing oper- 
ated throughout, consists essentially of: 
(а) А standard type of gas fuel regu- 

lator, with four port valves. 

(b) А diaphragm draft control regulator 
designed with ample power and 
stroke for operation of main jack 
shaft. 

Lever gas valve. 

Ball bearing operated shaft wall 
brackets and bell cranks, and levers, 
turnbuckles and connecting linkage. 


(c) 
(d) 


The operation of this system is as fol- 
lows, when installed in accordance with 
the accompanying diagram. 

The flow of gas is primarily controlled 
by the gas fuel regulator їп accordance 
with the steam demands upon the boiler. 
The fluctuations in gas flow obtained are 
transmitted to the diaphragm of the draft 
control regulator. The lever of the draft 
control regulator operates а 34” cold rolled 
steel shaft mounted on the boiler front in 
ball bearing brackets. То this shaft are 
connected, by a system of levers and turn- 
buckles, a lever gas valve, the stack damp- 
er and the louvre doors of the gas burners, 
so synchronized that any variations in 
steam demands will operate the gas valve, 
stack damper and louvre doors of the gas 
burners. 

The design of this system of gas fuel 
and draft control has been worked out and 
perfected with the following important con- 
siderations in mind: 


BA LEVER YORE 

ML  оэооообцеуея 
tos 

DIAPHRAGM STEM HEAD 


YOKE 
DIAPHRAGM STEM 


BALL BEARINGS 


SPRING 


DIAPHRAGM PLATE 

DIAPHRAGM TOP 

) Мыр DIAPHRAGM 
DIAPHRAGM BOT TOM 


wi -N,G.£. DRAFT CONTROL REGULATOR 


ТҮРЄ'б-14-@` 
DIAPHRAGM OF ВОШЕВ INSTALLATION 


А. Safety. 

B. Power available for successful oper- 
ation. 

C. Adjustment. 

D. Adaptability. 

The hazards encountered in the opera- 
tion of poorly designed damper equipment 
are obvious. For this reason, the prime 
consideration should be safety. In the svs- 
tem described above, through use of the 
lever gas valve, it is impossible to obtain 
the flow of gas to the boiler without oper- 
ating at the same time the louvre doors of 
the gas burners and the stack dampers. 
This is a feature of importance. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER EI 48 e MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


To meet varying degrees of power ауай- 
able for operating the equipment, the sys- 
tem utilizes ball bearings throughout, prac- 
tically eliminating friction and in addition, 
a very large size diaphragm is used on the 
draft control regulator which responds im- 
mediately to the slightest change in pres- 
sure. 

In order to accurately maintain the cor- 
rect proportions of air and gas over all 
boiler loads, it is also important that a 
damper control system be very flexible in 
the matter of adjustment. In this system, 
a wide range of adjustment has been pro- 
vided by simply changing the leverage. For 
example, should it be required to obtain the 
full opening of the louvre doors of the gas 
burners on a very slight change in gas pres- 
sure, this may be accomplished and at the 
same time the stack damper may be set so 
that very little change in position is ob- 
tained with a slight change in pressure. [n 
placing this system of draft control in oper- 
ation, it is essential to take stack gas analy- 
sis over the entire range of loads in order 
to obtain maximum combustion efficiency 
for all demands. 

One of the salient features of this sys- 
tem of draft control is its adaptability to all 
types and sizes of boilers. For some time, 
draft control equipment has been available 
for the larger boilers, but the same system 
could not be successfully applied to the 
smaller plants because of the size of the 
initial investment required which could not 
be justified in fuel savings. However. the 
apparatus is now applicable to boilers of 
practically any size, from 15 to 750 horse- 
power. 

The availability of this draft control 
equipment is not only making the use of 
gas fuel more economical, but is reducing 
the fuel costs of already existing gas-fired 
installations. Especially is this true where 
varying loads are encountered; savings as 
high as 30% have actually been realized. 
The savings on a boiler supplying a uni- 
form load is, of course, somewhat less, but 
nevertheless has justified the installation on 
every plant where it has been made. 

Following is an actual combustion analy- 
sis, which indicates the results to be ob- 
tained by the application of gas fuel and 


damper control for varying load boilers 
Stack gas analyses were made with the gas 
pressure on the burners at 34 pounds, 1.5 
pounds and 2.50 pounds. 


Gas Pressure at Burner 


2.75 lbs. 1.5 lbs. .75 lbs. 

(Heavy Load) (Average Load) (Light Load) 
CoU NES 10.6% 102% 98% 
O` 2.8% 3.2% 3.4% 
(onc CM 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 
Slack 
Temperature... 540F 515°F 475 Б 
Stack Draft... 083 052 03” 
Steam Pressure 125 lbs. 125 lbs. 125 lbs. 


Gas Per Hour.. 4960c, Ғ 3680c /f 2560c f 


TO ENFORCE ENGINEERS’ LAW 

The following cases in which prosecu- 
tions for violations of the Engineers’ Regis- 
tration Law were undertaken by the State 
Board of Registration for Civil Engineers, 
are reported by H. M. Jones, secretary of 
the board: 

“Preston M. Jones, of Los Angeles who 
had allowed his registration to lapse as of 
June 30, 1932, prepared structural plans 
for the J. C. Penny Company's store at 
Riverside. The city building department at 
Riverside returned the plans because they 
had not been prepared by a registered civil 
engineer, and this board was notified. As 
a result, a complaint was filed and Mr. 
Jones made the plea of ‘guilty’ in the munic- 
ipal court in Los Angeles where the plans 
had been made February 7, 1933. A sent- 
ence of thirty days in jail was imposed and 
suspended upon the condition that the de- 
fendant renew his certificate and not again 
practice in violation of the Act. 

“As a result of assuming responsible 
charge for the design and construction of 
the grandstand at the Compton dog track, 
Vern Ostendorf of Colton was taken be- 
fore the justice of the peace at Compton, 
for practicing civil engineering without be- 
ing registered. He entered a plea of ‘guilty’ 
and was fined $1.00 and sentenced to serve 
fifty days in the county jail. Certain miti- 
gating circumstances were responsible for 
the suspension of the fine and sentence 
upon the promise to comply with the law.” 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 49 к MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


LAYING CORNER STONE OF NEW BUILDINGS FOR DEPARTMENTS OF LABOR 
AND INTER-STATE COMMERCE, WASHINGTON, D. C. 


Arthur Brown, Jr., Architect 


L. А. Cruse and Fred Cramer, members of Mr. Brown's staff, are in the audience. 
President Hoover is before the microphone. 


SAYS USE MORE STEEL 


Steel piers, steel foundations, steel walls, steel 
floors, steel residences are ready for the market. 
They will be cheaper and will make for better 
construction, declared Charles F. Abbott of New 
York, executive director of the American Insti- 
tute of Steel Construction in an address before 
the Ninth Annual Conference of the Iron, Steel 
and Allied Industries of California at Del Monte, 
California, February 9. Мг. Abbott said that 
these improvements in steel construction, devel- 
oped from the intensive research of the past years 
of the depression, represent the industry's pro- 
gram to bring its business back to a prosperous 
basis. 


OUTSIDE CONTRACTORS AGAIN 


Out-of-town contractors have again been suc- 
cessful in bidding for San Francisco public work. 
Three Chicago contracting firms each submitted 
the lowest bids for the new $3,000,000 Federal 
building in the Civic Center; all considerably less 
than the bids of San Francisco concerns. It is 
hoped every effort wil be made to induce the 
successful Chicago contractor on this job to 
employ local labor and sublet, as far as possible. 
departmental contracts to San Francisco firms. If 
this method is followed the Bay region will bene- 
fit by the expenditure of several million dollars by 
the Federal Government; otherwise, the benefits 
will go elsewhere. 


THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER « 50 » MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


« « « « With the Architects » » » » 


SAN FRANCISCO MUNICIPAL WORK 

The office of City Architect Charles Sawyer, 
San Francisco, is busy on important remodeling 
work intended to provide for the centralization of 
the Department of Education. Quarters of the 
Board of Education are now scattered in several 
different buildings. The plan is to centralize the 
offices on the third and fourth floors of the Munic- 
ipai Auditorium. Plans for remodeling these two 
floors, at a cost of $26,000, are in progress. 

The Adams School Annex on Ellis Street, now 
used by the Board of Education, will be remod- 
eled and occupied by the Bush Street branch 
police station. To make this building available 
for police department needs, it will be necessary 
to remodel the ground floor, install a new heating 
plant, construct two cells and provide a shelter 
for the patrol wagon. 


CANNOT DO WITHOUT IT 
48 Oakdale Avenue, 
Berkeley, Calif. 
The Architect and Engineer, Inc., 
1662 Russ Building, 
San Francisco. 
Gentlemen: 

Enclosed please find check for the renewal of 
my subscription. Altho this is a bit late, I am 
scnding it as І have discovered that, good times 
or no, | must have your magazine if possible. 

Very truly yours, 

Артнив Е. DupMAN. 
OAKLAND STORE BUILDING 

А contract has been awarded to Е. А. Muller to 
build a steel frame and concrete store building at 
22nd Street and Broadway, Oakland, for E. H. 
and J. A. Clark. The location is a portion of the 
site of the old Key Route Inn. The building will 
cover ground area, 45x100 feet, and wil! have 
seven stores. 


SACRAMENTO SCHOOL BUILDING 

Plans have been completed by Harry J. Devine. 
architect of Sacramento, for a $100,000 brick 
school building for the Grant Union High School 
District. Bids for the construction of this building 
will be received March 27th. 


OAKLAND ARCHITECT BUSY 

Charles E, Perry, formerly of Vallejo, now lo- 
cated at 540 Alcatraz Avenue, Oakland, is busy 
on plans for several residences. He has completed 
drawings for a dwelling at Crockett for А. Valli 
of the Crockett Emporium and he is at work on 
plans for a Spanish patio type home at Vallejo 
to cost $7500 for an unnamed client and a two 
story English residence in Vallejo for $6000. 


EMPORIUM IMPROVEMENTS 

The Emporium, San Francisco, will spend about 
$100,000 on immediate improvements. The work 
will include a tunnel under Jessie Street and a 
bridge across Jessie Street from The Emporium 
Building to the Hulse-Bradford Building: also, a 
one-story reinforced concrete warehouse on Mis- 
sion Street, and a steel and concrete bridge con- 
necting The Emporium with the Red Cross Build- 


ing. 


APARTMENT BUILDING 

Plans are being prepared by R. R. Irvine, arch- 
itect, 2048 Market Street, San Francisco, for a 
$60,000 apartment building of frame construction 
to be built on the north east corner of Fillmore 
and North Point Streets, San Francisco, for Ben 
Leebman. There will be eighteen two, three and 
four room apartments. 


DALY CITY SCHOOL 

Revised plans for a two story reinforced con- 
crete addition to the Jefferson Union High School 
Building at Daly City, have been completed by 
Reising 6 McGuinness, architects, 488 Pine 
Street, San Francisco. Bids are being taken for 
the $50,000 structure, and contracts are expected 
to be awarded early next month. 


ЕВАМЕ APARTMENT HOUSE 

À four story and basement stucco apartment 
building will be erected on West Portal Avenue. 
east of 14th Avenue, San Francisco, by Mrs. Fer- 
nandez Nelson from plans by H. C. Baumann. 
architect, 351 Kearny Street, San Francisco. 
There will be twelve two and three room apart- 
ments. The approximate cost is $40,000. 


‘THE ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER E | 51 » MARCH, NINETEEN THIRTY-THREE 


POST OFFICE COMMISSIONS 

Recent commissions to prepare plans for Post 
Office Buildings in California have been handed 
out by the Treasury Department at Washington 
to the following architects:— 

Claude Beelman, 1019 Union Bank Building, 
Los Angeles; Post Office Building at Hollywood. 
$300,000. 

Gordon В. Kaufmann, 610 Union Bank Build- 
ing, Los Angeles; Federal Building at Long Beach, 
$450,000. 

Henry Carlton Newton and Robert Dennis 
Murray, Architects’ Building, Los Angeles; Post 
Office Building, Santa Monica, $225,000. 

S. Heiman, Santa Fe Building, San Francisco; 
Post Office Building at Lodi, $105,000. 

Bliss & Fairweather, Balboa Building, San 
Francisco; Post Office Building, Hayward, $100,- 
000. 

Ernest J. Kump, Fresno; Post Office Building, 
Madera, $90,000. 

O'Brien & Peugh, 333 Montgomery Street, San 
Francisco; Post Office Building, Salinas. 

Albert F. Roller, Crocker-First National Bank 
Building, San Francisco, Post Office Building. 
Redding, $100,000. 


DEMAND FOR FEBRUARY NUMBER 

The following letter is one of several received 
last month in praise of the February issue and 
for which the publishers are deeply grateful: 

Тне ARCHITECT AND ENGINEER, 
San Francisco, California. 
Gentlemen: 

The people who come into my office are so 
pleased with your February number, and so clam- 
oring for it that 1 must have six more copies, if 
you can send them. 

Upon receipt of same І shall remit. Thank you. 

Sincerely yours, 
CHARLES G. ADAMS, 
Landscape Architect. 


ARCHITECT FILES SUIT 

Eugene K. Martin, former Berkeley and Bak- 
ersfield architect, has sued for $500 monthly sep- 
arate maintenance from his wealthy wife, Eula, 
in the San Bernardino courts. Martin, graduate 
of University of Berlin, complained his wife 
failed to aid him when he lost his fortune, and 
that he was compelled to beg money from friends 
to "get a postage stamp or a haircut." 


REDWOOD CITY RESIDENCE 
J. K. Ballentine, 77 Harlem Place, San Fran- 
cisco, has completed plans for a two story frame 
and stucco residence to be built at Redwood City 
for A. B. Cheatham. The house will be Spanish 
design and will have a terra cotta tile roof. 


32 


MURAL WORK IS PRAISED 

Upon completion of the five year contract with 
Dean Cornwell for mural decorations of the ro- 
tunda of the Los Angeles Public Library, the 
Board of Library Commissioners in the presence 
of a number of distinguished guests including 
Mayor John Porter and art leaders of the City, 
drew up the following resolution: 


Dear Mr. Cornwell: 

In awarding to you the contract for the mural 
decorations in the rotunda of the Los Angeles 
Public Library, we were actuated by the convic- 
tion that your preliminary sketches were incom- 
parably superior to those of the other distinguished 
artists whose proposals were submitted for our 
consideration. 

And in accepting your completed work, it is 
gratifying to us to assure you that our highest ex- 
pectations have been more than realized. 

Your long continued researches, patience and 
energy, combined with your consummate skill and 
fidelity and devotion to the highest ideals in art, 
are reflected in the superb coloring, fine technique, 
historical accuracy and transcendent beauty of 
your masterful paintings, which not only have our 
unqualified approbation but have won the ac- 
claim and plaudits of the most exacting critics and 
connoisseurs. 

We are keenly conscious of the fact that the 
monetary rewards which have accrued to you from 
this work are in no measure conmmensurate with 
its real value, but we indulge the hope that you 
will find true compensation for your splendid serv- 
ices in the knowledge that multitudes of people 
will be enriched by the harmony, beauty and spir- 
itual qualities which have found expression 
through your genius. 


BAY BRIDGE ARCHITECTURE 

At a meeting held in San Francisco, January 
31, the Northern California Chapter of The 
American Institute of Architects went on record 
by unanimous vote to the following effect: 

“That it is imperatively necessary for the future 
interests of San Francisco, Oakland, the Metro- 
politan Area and the entire State of California 
for the new San Francisco Bay Bridge to have 
the benefit of competent architectural service in 
the study and carrying out of its design. Such 
service can only be rendered by an architect or 
architects of recognized ability and standing. 

“In this connection, certain vital facts must be 
considered: 

“1. That the California Toll Bridge Authority, 
for the people of California, is proceeding to carry 
into actual construction the greatest bridge proj- 
ect ever attempted in the history of man; 

“2. That this structure will not only affect the 
physical appearance of the finest harbor in the 
world, but will establish the first impression of the 
two major cities facing each other on the shores 
of San Francisco Bay; 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


73. That the entire Metropolitan Area has by 
various acts and efforts of its citizens definitely 
gone on record for the development of beauty in 
its public works, both utilitarian and monumental; 

"4. That the entire State of California has the 
greatest pride in the quality and design of its pub- 
lic ediflces, as well as in its far-famed scenic and 
natural heritage. 

“5. That New York City has by her farsighted 
policy permanently established her fame as the 
largest metropolis in the world today, and, in no 
small measure, by linking her metropolitan areas 
with great bridge structures. In every case, archi- 
tects of recognized ability and standing collab- 
orated with the engineers in charge to accomplish 
works of outstanding beauty, utility and magni- 
tude. The magnificence of the Williamsburg. Hell 
Gate and, more recently, the Washington Bridge 
across the Hudson, has been and will be associ- 
ated for all time with the authors of their archi- 
tectural designs, Carrere and Hastings. Henry 
Hornbostel, and Cass Gilbert. 

"Those in charge of the Golden Gate Bridge 
have shown their understanding of this principle 
and precedent by engaging the able services of 
architects Morrow and Morrow to mould this 
gigantic structure into forms of beauty under the 
general direction of Chief Engineer Joseph B. 
Strauss. 

"In view of these facts, we urge that the au- 
thorities who have responsible charge of this great 
project give their most earnest consideration to 
this important phase of the undertaking and give 
to the public at an early date assurance that the 
architectural design and appearance of the bridge 
will be adequately safeguarded.” 


GOOD 1933 PROSPECTS 
Folger Johnson and C. H. Wallwork, architects, 
United States Bank Building, Portland, have оп 
hand good prospects for three projects this year, 
— а hotel estimated to cost $250,000, a hotel alter- 
ation listed at $20,000, and a store and apartment 
building which calls for a $10.000 investment. 


"PHONE EXCHANGE ADDITION 

The Pacific Telephone 6 Telegraph Company 
will build a two story and basement brick addition 
to the Bush and Larkin Streets Exchange from 
plans by E. V. Cobby, 140 New Montgomery 
Street, San Francisco. The contract for the struc- 
tural steel has been awarded to the Judson-Pacific 
Company. — 
SAN FRANCISCO JAIL 

Until March 29th bids will be received by the 
San Francisco Board of Public Works for the 
construction of a Class A reinforced concrete city 
and county jail in San Mateo County. 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


PERSONAL 

DowNELL E. JAEKLE, 714 Call Building. San 
Francisco, has been granted a provisional certifi- 
cate to practice architecture, by the California 
State Board of Architectural Examiners, North- 
ern District. 

The firm of CLAUSEN AND AMANDES, architects, 
has been dissolved, and C. О. CLausen will con- 
tinue the practice of architecture under his own 
name at the attractive studios, 746-46th Avenue, 
San Francisco. Recent work in Mr. Clausen's 
office includes a one story reinforced concretc 
printing plant on Harrison Street for the Daily 
Racing Form. 

W. С. Brust, architect of Seattle, has moved 
his studio to his home, 6223 Palatine Avenue, 
Seattle. He has been retained to prepare plans 
for the proposed new Stockade Hotel at Alki 
Point, Seattle. 

WILLIAM J. Bain, architect, with offices at 1715 
Yale Avenue, Seattle, has recently prepared the 
plans for an addition to the Albe mansion at Lake 
Burien, which will provide a new home for the 
Ruth School of Girls. 

С. М, FREEMAN, architect of Portland, who is 
a specialist in school design, is supervising the 
construction of a new $15,000 building for the 
Sylvan District. 

А. M. EDELMAN and А. C. ZIMMERMAN, arch- 
itects, have moved from 824 H. W. Hellman 
Building to 709 Н, W. Hellman Building, Los 
Angeles. 

DoucAN-REvERMAN, Inc., architectural firm of 
Portland, has moved from the Kraemer Building. 
where the two partners have been located for some 
years, to the Studio Building, Taylor Strect at 
Park, Portland. 

J. Leo FAIRBANKS, professor of art at Oregon 
State College, Corvallis, Oregon, was recently 
elected to membership in the Architectural League 
of New York. Professor Fairbanks' paintings 
have been consistent winners in gallery competi- 
tions in Portland and other art centers. 

B. Рирьвү STUART, veteran Seattle architect. 
has moved his office from the Walker Building to 
5111 Arcade Building. He is active as a designer 
of residences, apartment houses and commercial 
hotels. 

James Monroe TavLonm. JR. architect, 2042 
Boylston Avenue North. Seattle, has taken desk 
space in Mr. Stuart's office. 


LOS ANGELES BREWERY 
Preliminary plans are being prepared by Claude 
Beelman, Union Bank Building. Los Angeles, for 
a brewery at Hlth Street and Santa Fe Avenue. 
Los Angeles. for the Hauser Brewing Company. 


53 


PLANT OF THE PACIFIC PORTLAND CEMENT COMPANY, REDWOOD CITY, 
CALIFORNIA, WHERE ALL THE CEMENT FOR THE GOLDEN САТЕ 
BRIDGE WILL BE MANUFACTURED 


HE task of supplying materials—thousands 
iof tons of steel, cement, sand and rock— 
tor the Golden Gate bridge occupies the attention 
of leading Pacific Coast companies whose con- 
tracts wil tax plant facilities to the limit for 
months. 

Approximately 350,000 cu. yds. of concrete will 
be mixed by Golden Gate Atlas Materials Com- 
pany, a subsidiary of Pacific Coast Aggregates, 
Inc., for the piers and anchorages of the span. 
From the plant of Pacific Portland Cement Com- 
pany at Redwood City will come 1,800,000 bar- 
rels of cement. 

The bridge will furnish 27,000,000 man hours 
of labor at the site and in shops and mills, stat- 
isticians estimate. 

Among the most interesting features of the 
material delivery will be in the handling of the 
tons of cement on which the Pacific Portland 
Cement Company already has commenced pro- 
duction at Redwood City. 

Cement will be loaded on barges at the mill. 
These will be towed to the sites of two batching 
plants near the anchorages on opposite sides of 
the Golden Gate. From the barges the bulk 
cement will be sucked by pipes into huge con- 
crete silos. 


54 


From the batching plants rotary mixers mount- 
ed on trucks will be used to carry the concrete a 
distance of from one-half to two miles to hoppers. 
The trucks will run over a trestle 1500 feet long. 
extending into the center of the Golden Gate. 
These truck mixers will travel from the plant on 
the San Francisco side to the site of the anchor- 
age and on the Marin side trucks will climb over 
the hill above the shore line where the Marin 
anchorage is located. 


The economical plan for handling the huge 
quantities of cement in bulk for the Golden Gate 
bridge was originated by J. A. McCarthy, vice 
president and general manager of the Pacific 
Portland Cement Company, and Charles M. Cad- 
man, president of Pacific Coast Aggregates, both 
veterans in the materials business. 


The plants were designed by Messrs. McCarthy 
and Cadman to reduce the handling of materials 
to a minimum and to utilize the most modern 
mechanical equipment ever brought to the Coast. 
Consideration in award of the contracts to Pacific 
Portland Cement Company and Golden Gate 
Atlas Materials, Inc., was given to the ability of 
these concerns to provide necessary equipment 
essential to the exceptionally large undertaking. 


The Architect and Enginecr, March, 1933 


Estimator's Guide 


Giving Cost of Building Materials, Wage Scale, Etc. 


Amounts quoted are figuring prices and are made up from average quotations 
furnished by material houses to three leading contracting firms of San Francisco. 


All prices and wages quoted are for 
San Francisco and the Bay District. 
There may be sligbt fluctuation of 
prlces in the interlor and southern 
part of the state. Freigbt cartage, at 
least, must be added in figuring coun- 
try work. 

Overtime in wage scale should be 
credited with time and a half, Sunday 
and holidays double. 


Bond—1!276 amount of contract. 


Brickwork— 


Common, $26 to $32 per 1000 laid, 
(according to class of work). 
Face, $60 to $80 per 1000 laid, (ac- 
cording to class of work). 

Brick Steps, using pressed brick, 
$.85 lin. ft. 

Brick Walls, using pressed brick on 
edge, 55с sq. ft. (Foundations ex- 


tra.) 

Brick Veneer on frame buildings, 
$.60 sq. ft. 

Common, f. o. b. cars, $14.00 plus 
cartage. 

Face, 1.0.5. cars, $38.00 per 1000, 


carload lots. 
HOLLOW TILE FIREPROOFING (f.o.b. job) 
3x12x12 in.. ... $ 68.00 per M 


4x12x12 in.. 76.50 per M 
6x12x12 in.. ... 105.00 per M 
xoa xia GT) eee 170.00 per M 
HOLLOW BUILDING TILE (f.o.b. job) 
carload lots). : 
8x12x514 .. .... $76.50 
6x12x515 59.50 


Composition Floors — 18c to 30c per 
sq. ft. In large quantities, 18c per 
Sq. ft. laid. 

Mosaic Floors—80c per sq. ft. 


Duraílex Floor—23c to 30c sq. ft. 
Rubber Tile—50c per sq. ít. 

Terazzo Floors—40c to 55c per sq. ft. 
Terazzo Steps—$1.50 lin. ft. 


Concrete Work (material at San Fran- 
cisco bunkers) — Quotations below 
2000 lbs. to the ton. 


No. 3 rock, at bunkers........ $1.66 per ton 
No. 4 rock, at bunkers...... 1.65 per ton 
Elliott top gravel, at bnkrs. 1.75 per ton 
Washed gravel, at bunkrs 1.75 per ton 
Eliott top gravel, at bnkrs. 1.75 per ton 
City gravel, at bunkers.... 1.40 per ton 
River sand, at bunkers...... 1.50 per ton 
Delivered bank sand............ 1.10 cu yd. 


Note—Above prices are subject to dis- 
count of 10c per ton on invoices paid 
on or before the 15th of month, fol- 
lowing delivery. 

SAND 
Del Monte, $1.75 to $3.00 per ton. 
Fan Shell Beach (car lots, f.o.b. 


The Architect and Engineer, Mareh, 1933 


Lake Majella), $2.75 to $4.00 per 
ton. 

Cement, $2.25 per bbl. in paper sks. 

Cement (f.o.b. Job, S. Е.) $2.45 рег 
bbl. 

Cement (f.o.b. Job, Oak.) $2.45 per 


per bb 
Rebate of 10 cents bbl. cash in 15 
days. 
Medusa “White” .......... $ 8.50 per bbl. 


Forms, Labors average 22.00 per M. 
Average cost of concrete in place, 
exclusive of forms, 28c per cu. ft. 
4-inch concrete basement 
Noone 12%c to 13%c per sq. ft. 
415 inch Concrete Basement 
Воот. 13c to 14c per ва. ft. 
2-inch rat-proofing...635c per sq. ft. 
Concrete Steps.......... $1.00 per lin. ft. 


Dampproofing and Waterproofing— 
Two-coat work, 15с per yard. 
Membrane waterproofing—4 layers 

of saturated felt, $4.00 per square. 
Hot coating work, $1.80 per square. 
Meduca Waterproofing, 15с рег 1Ь., 
San Francisco Warehouse. 


Electric Wiring — $2.75 to $8.50 per 
outlet for conduit work (including 


Switches). 

Knob and tube average $2.25 to 
$5.00 per outlet, including 
switches. 

Elevators— 


Prices vary according to capacity, 
speed and type. Consult elevator 
companies. Average cost of in- 
stalling an automatic elevator in 
four-story building, $2450; direct 
automatic, about $2400. 


Excavation— 

Sand, 40 cents; clay or shale, Тос 
per yard. 

Teams, $10.00 per day. 

Trucks, $18 to $25 per day. 

Above figures are an average with- 
out water. Steam shovel work in 
large quantities, less; hard ma- 
terial, such as rock, will run con- 
siderably more. 


Fire Escapes— 
Ten-foot balcony, with stairs, 
$65.00 per balcony. 


Glass (consult with manufacturers)— 

Double strength window glass, 15c 
per square foot. 

Quartz Lite, 50c per square foot. 
Plate 65c per square foot. 

Art, $1.00 up per square foot. 

Wire (for skylights), 27c per square 
foot. 

Obscure glass, 25c square foot. 

Note—Add extra for setting. 


ди ААА 
Е 


Heating— 
Average, $1.60 per sq. ft. of radia- 
tion, according to conditions. 


Ігоп-Сові of ornamental ]гоп, cast 
Iron, etc., depends on designs. 
Lumber (prices delivered to bldg. site) 
Common, $19.50 per M (average). 
Common О.Р. select, average, $25.00 


per M. 
1x6 No. 3—Form Lumber ............14.00 per M 
1х4 No. 1 flooring VG .... .... 42.00 per M 
1х4 No. 2 flooring ... 36.00 per M 
1x4 No. 3 flooring 30.00 per M 
1х6 No. 2 flooring 42.00 per M 
144x4 and 6 No. 2 50.00 per M 
Slash grain— 
1х4 No. 2 flooring ... -...$30.00 per М 
1х4 No. 8 flooring ... 26.00 рег М 
No. 1 common run T. & С. 26.00 per M 
Шаба еселене teu E 4.00 per M 


Shingles (add cartage to prices 
quoted)— 
Redwood, No. 1 .........$ .85 per Бе. 


Redwood, No. 2 —..._-...-.._ 165 per bdle. 
Red Cedar . .... 2 «715 per bdle. 


Hardwood Floorlng (delivered to 


building)— 
13-16х31;” Т & G Maple .......... $ 90.00 M ft. 
1 1-16х214” T & С Маре... 117.00 M ft. 
T7T&x314 sq. edge Maple .......-....... 110.00 M ft. 
1916x214" 8х2” Б-16х2” 
т&с T&G  Sq.Ed. 


Clr. Qtd. Oak ....$175.00 М $126.00 M $168 M 


Sel. Qtd. Oak ... 115.00 M 95.00 М 110M 
Cir. Pla. Oak ... 110.00 М 87.00M 95M 
Sel. Pla. Oak — 106.00 M 68.00M 82M 
Clear Maple ...... - 110.00M 82.00 M 

Laying & Finishing 1464. 12ft. Ile ft. 


Wage—Floor layers, $9.00 per day. 


Building Paper— 


1 ply per 1000 ft. roll 
2 ply per 1000 ft. roll... 
3 ply рег 1000 ft. roll... 
Sisalkraft, 500 ft. roll... 
Sash cord com. No. 7.. $ 
Sash cord com. No. 8. 1.10 per 100 ft. 
Sash cord spot No. 7. 1.60 per 100 ft. 
Sash cord spot No. 8—..... 1.90 per 100 ft. 
Sash weights cast iron, $45.00 ton 
Nails, $2.85 base. 
Belgian nails, $2.60 base. 

LC EE 


Millwork— 

О. P. $65.00 рег 1000. R. W., $75.00 
рег 1000 (delivered). 

Double hung box window frames, 
average, with trim, $4.00 and up. 
eacb. 

Doors, including trim (single panel, 
134 in. Oregon pine) $5.00 and up, 
each. 

Doors, including trim (five panel, 
134 in. Oregon pine) $4.75 each. 

Screen doors, $3.50 each. 

Patent screen windows, 20c a sq. ft. 
Cases for kitchen pantrles seven ft. 
high, per lineal ft., $4.25 each. 
Dining room cases, $5.25 per lineal 

foot. 

Labor—Rough carpentry, warehouse 
heavy framing (average), $11.00 
per M. 

For smaller work, average, $22 to 
$30 per 1000. 


55 


2 coats, hard wall plaster, wood lath.... 


Marble— (See Dealers) 3 coats, metal lath and nlaater 


Redwood Shingles, $11.00 per square 
in place. 


t 1 lath Ы х 
Painting— Е Cedar Shingles, $10 sq. ш place. 
Two-coat work 27с per yard [ан сыыс ш ae шш; 65 Recoat, with Gravel, $3.00 per ва. 
Three-coat work .. .36с per yard Gor cn 4 hot roll channels metal - 
Cold Water Painting ...... 8c per yard ee $ s Sheet Metal— 
Whitewashing .................. 4c per yard Single partition 34 channel lath 2 aides Windows—Metal, $1.80 a sq. foot. 
Turpentine, 70c per gal, in cans and 2 inches thick ... Fire doors (average), including 
80с per gal. in drums. DUM partition 94 channel lath hardware, $2.00 per sq. ft. 
Raw Linseed Oil—62c gal. in ШЕ ое partition 94 channel lath о. Skylights 
Boiled Linseed Oil—65c gal. in bbls. sides plastered ....................... 2. 30 =. 
int. 2 Plastering—Exterior— Copper, 90c sq. ft. (not glazed). 
B s ae ашан: Petai, dus 2 ; ее Уага Galvanized iron, 25с sq. ft. (not 
: қ ont 
Carter or Dutch Boy White Lead in , тее wall En S OR. сш glazed). 
Oil (in steel kegs). coats Atla Steel Structural 
Per Lb. р crete wall ... х А А , 
1 ton lots, 100 Ibs. net weight 10% | 7 сөлін cement айй No. їй Fane #78 ton (erected), this) ah ШШШ 
500 Ib. and less than 1 ton lots 11c 8 coats Medusa finish No. 18 gauge eA Ligh 
Less than BOOM, ios a a 1114 с ЧОО Ере numm ет 2. (c с. .90 small quantities. Light truss 
Boy Dry Ked Lead and Wood lath, $4.00 per 1000. $ work higher. Plain beams and 
Muar toy oy on Uoni em 2.ö-lb. metal lath (dipped) М column work іп large quantities 
Litharge (in steel kegs). 2.8-1Ь. metal lath (galvanized).. .20 т 75 t t ot tse 
1 ton lots, 100 1b. kegs, net wt. 10%c 3.4-Ib. metal lath (dipped)..... 390 $71 to $7 1 per ton cost ої steel; 
9 P Е 2 3.4-Ib. metal lath (galvanized)... с 228 average building, $77.00. 
500 Ib. and less than 1 ton lots 11с 34-inch hot roll channels, $72 per ton. : mni 
Е Steel Reinforcing. 
Less than 500 Ib. 10ї5.................. 11%с Finish plaster, $16.40 ton; in рарег sacks, 68.0 t ) 
Red Lead In Oil (in steel kegs) р. commission, $1.00 off above $68.00 per ton, set, (average). 
E quotation&. 


1 ton lots, 100 Ib. keg s,net. wt. 1215c 


т m 3 : s 95-5 (rebate 10с sack). M ги Stone— 

. an SS than 1 ton lo il с ime, f.o.b. warehouse, * . cars, $2. 1 . Й ] 

jud та UE E (а 9 Lime, bulk (ton 2000 iba.), $16.00 ton. Gran average, $650 си. foot in 
5. СЕЕ Wall Board 5 ply, $43.00 per М. рсе 

Note—Accessibility and conditions Hydrate Lime. $19.50 ton. Sandstone, average Blue, $3.50: 


cause wide variance of costs. Composition Stueco—$1.35 to $1.75 per 


Boise, $2.60 sq. ft. in place. 
sq. yard (applied). 


Indiana Limestone, $2.60 per sq. ft. 


Patent Chimneys— 


bcnc --— — ——— $ .85 lineal foot | Plnmbing— in place. 

8-inch.. 1.25 lineal foot From $50.00 per fixture up, accord- Store Fronts— 

10-inch.. 1.40 lineal foot ing to grade, quantity and runs. Copper sash bars for store fronts, 
12-inch.. .. 1.60 lineal foot 


corner, center and around sides, 
will average 70c per lineal foot. 
Note—Consult with agents. 


Roofing— 
“Standard” tar and gravel, $5.00 per 
square for 30 squares or over. 
Less than 30 squares. $5.25 per sq. 
Tile, $16.00 to $25.00 per square. 


Plastering—I nterior— 
Yard 
l coat, brown mortar only, wood lath....$0.36 


2 coate, lime mortar hard finish, wood 
М ceca uere il л 


Tile — Floor, Wainscot, Ete. — (See 
Dealers). 


SAN FRANCISCO BUILDING TRADES WAGE SCALE FOR 1933 


Established by The Impartial Wage Baard Navember 9, 1932. Effective an all wark January 1, 1933, ta remain in effect until June 30, 1933, and for so 
long thereafter as ecanomic conditions remain substantially unchanged. 


This scale ia based on an eight-hour day and is to be considered as a minimum and employees of superior 
skill and craft knowledge may be paid in exceas of the amounts set forth herein. 


Journeyman Journeyman CRAFT Journeyman 
CRAFT Mechanics CRAFT Mechanica Mechanics 
Aabestor Workers $6.40 iron Workers (Bridge and Structural). 9.60 Stair Builders -. 7,20* 
Bricklayers .... 9.00 lron Workers (Hoisting Engineers) . 10.00 Stene Cutters, Soft and Granite . . 6.80 
Bricklayers’ Ha * 5.60 Laborers (6-day week) ... . 5.00 Stone Setters, Soft and Granite . . 8.00 
Cabinet Workers (Outside) . 7.20* Lathers, Channel Iron 8.00 Stone Derrickmen 7.20 
Caisson Workers (Open) Water Work 8.00 Lathers, All Other . 6.80 Tile Setters ........... . 8.00 
Carpenters Marble Setters ......... 8.00 Tile Setters’ Helpers . 5.00 
Cement Finishers 7.20 Marble Setters’ Нерсга . . 5.00 Tile, Cork and Rubber . сз 7.20 
Cork Insulation Workers . 7.20 Millwrights . 7.20* Welders, Structural Steel Frame оп 
Electrical Workera ........... 8.00 Mosaic and Terrazzo Workers (Outside) 7.20 Buildings ............ e ... 9.60 
Electrical Fixture Hangera 7.00 Мозаіс and Terrazzo Helpera . 5.00 Welders, All Others on Bnildin 8.00 
Elevator Censtructors ........ 8.68 Painters . 7.00 Auto Truck Drivera—Leas than 2,500 5.50 
Elevator Constructora’ Helpers 6.08 Painters, Auto Truck  Drivers—2,500 Iba. 
Engineers, Portable and Hoisting . 8.00 тает 4,500 lbs; E 6.00 
Glass Workers (АП Classifications) .. 6.80 Pile Drivers and Wharf Builders . 8.00 Auto Truck  Drivera—4,500 Ika. to 
Hardweod Fleermen 7.20* Pile Drivers Engineers . . 9,00 6,500. Tha, uu еН 6.50 
Housemovers ........... . 6.40 Plasterers _........................ . 8.80 Auto Truck Drivera—6,500 lbs. and over 7.00 
Housesmiths, Architectural Iron (Out- Plasterers' Hodcarriers . 6.00 General Teamsters, 1 Horse .. 5.90 
Lia EE 7.20 Plumbers .................-- . 8.00 General Teamsters, 2 Horses .. 6.00 
Housesmiths, Reinferced Concrete, or Roofers (АП classifications) . 6.40 General Teamsters, 4 Horses . 6.50 
Кейшет 2.22... 7.20 Shect Metal Workera . 7.20 Plow Teamsters, 4 Horses .. . 6.50 
Sprinkler Fitters . . 9.00 Seraper Teamsters, 2 Horses . 6.00 
*Established by Special Board Steam Fitters . 8.00 Scraper Teamsters, 4 Horses 6.00 


1 


2. 


NOTE: Provision of 


. Plasterers’ 


GENERAL WORKING CONDIT 


. Eight hours shall constitute a day's work 
for all crafts, except as otherwise noted. 
Where less than eight hours are worked 
pro rata rates for auch shorter period shall 
be paid. 

Hodcarriers, Bricklayers’ Hod- 
carriers, Roofers’ Laborers and Engineers, 
Portable and Hoisting, shall start 15 min- 
utes before other workmen, both at morn- 
ing and at noon, 

. Five days, consisting of not more than 
eight hours a day, on Monday to Friday 
inclusive, shall conatitute a week's work. 

- The wages set forth herein shall be con- 

sidered as net wages. 

Except as noted the above rates of pay ap- 

ply only to work performed at the job 

site. 

- Transportation costs in excess of twenty- 

five cents each way shall be paid by the 

contractor, 

Traveling time in excess of one and one- 

half hours each way shall be paid for at 

straight time rates. 


wrights, or Stair Builders, 


56 


9 


10 


11 


12. 


13. 


. Overtime shall be paid as follows: For 
the first four houra after the first eight 
hours, time and one-half. All time there- 
after shall be paid double time. Satur- 
days (except Laborers), Sundays and Holi- 
days from 12 midnight of the preceding 
day, shall be paid double time. Irrespec- 
tive of starting time, overtime for Cement 
Finishers shall not commence until after 
eight hours of work. 

. On Saturday Laborers shall be 
straight time for an eight-hour day. 


. Where two shifta are worked in апу 
twenty-four hours, shift time shall be 
straight time. Where three shifts are 
worked, eight hours' pay shall be paid 
for seven hours on the second and third 
shifta. 

АП work, except as noted in paragraph 
13, shall be performed between the hours 
of 8 A. M, and 5 P. M. 


Іп emergencies, or where premises cannot 
be vacated until the close of business, 


paid 


IONS 


14. 


16. 


men reporting for work shall work at 
straight time. Any work performed on 
such jobs after midnight shall be paid 
time and one-half up to four hours of 
overtime and double time thereafter (pro- 
vided, that if а new crew is employed on 
Saturdays, Sundays or Holidays which has 
not worked during the five preceding work- 
ing days, such crew shall be paid time 
and one-half. No job can be considered 
as an emergency job until it hea been 
registered with the Industrial Association 
and a determination has been made that 
the job falls within the terma of this 
section). 

Recognized holidays to be: New Year's 
Day, Decoration Day, Fourth of July, 
Labor Day, Admiasion Day, Thanksgiving 
Day, Christmas Day. 

Men ordered to report for work, for 
whom no employment ig provided shall be 
entitled to two hours’ pay. 

This award shall be effective in the City 
and County of San Francisco. 


paragraph 13 appearing in brackets ( ) does not app'y to Carpenters, Cabinet Workers (Outside), Hardwood Floormen, Mill- 


The Architcct and Engineer, March, 1933 


Chapter and Club Meetings | 


І! 


SAN FRANCISCO CHAPTER 
The monthly meeting of the Northern Califor- 
nia Chapter, А.1.А., was held at the Cafe Mar- 
quard, San Francisco, on Tuesday evening, Jan- 
uary 31, President John J. Donovan presiding. 
The minutes of the previous meeting were ap- 


proved as published. 


Mr. Donovan introduced David Bridgman 
Clark, newly elected Associate of the Chapter. 

The following proposed amendment to the 
by-laws was introduced by the committee on edu- 
cation, Irving В. Morrow, chairman; 


Article IV—Section 8—Education Fund 


Thereby is created an Education Fund which is 
inaugurated to include the fund in the treasury 
commonly known by this name at the time of the 
adoption of this amendment. This fund shall be 
administered by the committee on education and 
shall be kept by the treasurer in a separate inter- 
est-bearing account. Under no circumstances shall 
the principal of this fund or any portion thereof 
be withdrawn or in any way used; and no interest 
thereon shall be withdrawn or used before the 
principal of the fund shall have reached the sum 
of Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars 
($2,500.00). Income from this fund shall be used 
only for purposes clearly connected with the edu- 
cation of students in architecture. No disburse- 
ment shall be made without the written author- 
ization of the committee on education. 

It was instructed that the proposed change be 


published to every member as required in the by- 
laws. 

A suggestion from R. J. Ashton, A.I.A. direc- 
tor, West Mountain Division, that a regional con- 
ference be held in San Francisco, in lieu of the 
general convention of the Institute, was discussed. 
It was felt that such a conference would be of 
little benefit and was not endorsed. 

Mr. Donovan reported the action of the board 
of directors in continuing its effort to have public 
buildings designed by architects in private prac- 
tice. A copy of the telegram pertaining thereto 
and sent to President-Elect Roosevelt was read. 
A motion endorsing the action of the board was 
made by Mr. Bakewell and carried. 

The following resolution was introduced by Mr. 
Fairweather, who moved its adoption with Mr. 
Kent seconding it: 

WHEREAS, Due to the general reduction in 
building and land values and reduced cost of con- 
struction in San Francisco. 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


THEREFORE, Be it resolved that the North- 
ern California Chapter, the American Institute of 
Architects, petition the Assessor of San Francisco 
to make a re-survey of the San Francisco build- 
ings and land values with a view of reducing the 
assessed valuation of same so as to stimulate 
action in building. 

An amendment thereto, that a copy of the reso- 
lution be sent to the State Association of Califor- 
nia Architects with the request that it be trans- 
mitted to each District Society, was made by Mr. 
Kent and accepted. With this modification, the 
resolution was voted upon and passed. 

А proposed kitchen competition program to be 
held by the General Electric Company was re- 
ferred to the small house committee of the State 
Association for an opinion. Subject to its ap- 
proval, the Chapter will respond as requested. 

At the request of the Federation of Arts, en- 
dorsement was made of the proposed widening 
of Fulton Street, westerly from the Civic Center, 
San Francisco. The resolution of endorsement 
was drafted in committee and approved. 

Mr. Donovan asked Mr. Jeans. vice-president, 
to preside in his place and the meeting was con- 
ducted thereafter under this chairmanship. 

А discussion was held of ways to aid needy 
draftsmen. At Mr. Donovan's suggestion, it was 
directed that ап emergency relief committee be 
appointed to cooperate with the State Associa- 
tion in promotion of this cause. Messrs. String- 
ham, Fairweather and Bakewell were appointed 
thereon. 

In a discussion of Institute and Chapter dues. 
Mr. Evers urged that a strong presentation be 
made to the Institute to treat delinquent members 
with leniency and reduce dues, if possible. His 
motion to this effect was carried. 

Mr. Evers spoke on the necessity of proper 
architectural consultation on the San Francisco 
Bay Bridge, if its appearance is to be safeguarded. 
At his suggestion, a committee was authorized to 
study the matter and present a resolution to the 
board of directors for approval. Messrs. Kent, 
Evers and Allen were appointed as this commit- 
tee. The board of directors was authorized to 
accept the resolution as being the sense of the 
meeting and it was further instructed to transmit 
same to the California Toll Bridge Authority and 
others connected therewith.—].H.M. 


57 


WASHINGTON STATE CHAPTER 

'The regular monthly Chapter meeting was held 
in the Gold room of the New Washington Hotel, 
Seattle, Thursday, February 9. 

'The minutes of the annual meeting and of the 
preceding regular meeting were read by the secre- 
tary and approved. Following this the secretary 
read a letter from the Chicago Chapter, asking 
endorsement of Alfred Hoyt Grainger, А.[.А., for 
Assistant Secretary of the Treasury in charge of 
Public Works. The endorsement of the Washing- 
ton State Chapter was unanimously voted and 
the secretary was instructed to telegraph Presi- 
dent-elect Roosevelt to this effect. 

The president read the committee appointments 
for 1933 as follows: 

Standing Committees: Civic Design—Gowen, 
Chairman; Morrison, Bertelsen, Vice-Chairmen; 
Albertson, Myers. 

Competition—Grant, Chairman; Mock, Pehr- 
son, Vice-Chairman; Alden, Bockerman. 

Education — Gould, Chairman; Gove, 
Vice-Chairmen; Baeder, Gowen, Mallis. 

Exhibition—Stoddard, Chairman; Ekvall, Bee- 
man, Vice-Chairmen; Bain, Chinn, Donald 
Thomas. 

Institute Affairs—Borhek, Chairman; Weller, 
Vice-Chairman; Albertson, Ford. 

Legislation—Vogel, Chairman; Young, Borhek, 
Wohleb, Lockman. 

Ordinances—Lockman, Chairman; Bell, Bertel- 
sen, Vice-Chairmen; Brust, Naramore. 

Professional Practice—McClelland, Chairman; 
Whitehouse, Vice-Chairmen: Schack, Stoddard. 

Public Information—Victor Jones, Chairman; 
Nelsen, Smith, Vice-Chairmen; Grainger, Priteca, 
Vogel. 

Ways and Means—Priteca, Chairman; Mock, 
Maloney, Vice-Chairmen; Albertson, Bain, 

Special Committees; Building Industry Contact 
—Harlan Thomas, Chairman; Borhek, Уісе- 
Chairman; Ford, Graham. 

Bulletin—Alden, Chairman; Rounds, Beeman, 
Vice-Chairmen; Johnson, Meredith Jones, Willat- 
sen, Bindon. 

City Planning—Alden, Chairman; Gove, Bee- 
man, Vice-Chairmen; Williams. 


Smith, 


Craftsmanship—Willatsen, Chairman; Russell, 
Whitehouse, Vice-Chairmen; Bergseth, Loveless. 

Domestic Architecture—Bain, Chairman; Ivey, 
Loveless, Skoog. 

Federal Buildings—Graham, Chairman; Bock- 
erman, Lockman, Vogel, Wilson. 

Honor Awards — Allen, Chairman: Gove, 
Mincy, Vice-Chairmen; Hinman, Reamer. 

Lumber Industry Contact—Holmes, Chairman; 


38 


Bell, Weller, Vice-Chairman; 
Herrman. 

Membership— Young, Chairman; Borhek, Bee- 
man, Vice-Chairmen; Bain, Herrman, Stoddard. 

Program—Donald Thomas, Chairman; Victor 
Jones, Meyers. 

Reports from Chapter Committees being next 
in order, Mr. Stoddard, chairman of the exhibi- 
tion committee, spoke of the proposed exhibition 
of small houses to be held at the Bon Marche, 
Seattle, and asked the co-operation of all mem- 
bers in collecting sketches, with costs of houses 
between $5,000 and $15,000. 

President Holmes reported a movement spon- 
sored by the American Institute of Architects, 
American Society of Civil Engineers, and Asso- 
ciated General Contractors of America, to intro- 
duce in the State Legislatures bills inaugurating 
building programs for public works for six years 
ahead, a local organization having been formed 
for this purpose, headed by Joseph Jacobs of the 
Seattle section of the American Society of Civil 
Engineers. After some discussion in which was 
brought out the idea that legislators should be 
shown the greater amount of employment per dol- 
lar in the construction of buildings than in other 
forms of construction, it was voted that the Chap- 
ter approve the movement and that the president 
be authorized to further legislation of this kind. 


Albertson, Ford, 


HOLDS FOUR MEETINGS 

Four interesting sessions were held during the 
past month by the Tacoma Society of Architects 
with President Ernest T. Mock occupying the 
chair. Further action dealing with the proposed 
restoration of St. Luke’s Church was held in abey- 
ance pending the disposition of the legal contest 
between the church trustees and the wrecking 
contractor. The meetings are noted as follows: 

January 16: Report on the proceedings of the 
Washington Chapter, А.1.А., in Seattle, by Ted 
Jacobsen, and a talk on technical building prob- 
lems by Walter Nelson, president of the Tacoma 
Chapter, A.S.C.E. 

January 23: “Proposed Construction of the 
Bridge Across The Narrows, Designed to Make 
а One-Mile Span Across Puget Sound" — by 
Llewellyn Evens, Supt. of the Tacoma Light De- 
partment and one of the incorporators of the 
bridge company. 

January 30: Contest announced for the selec- 
tion of the best house in the state of Washing- 
ton to be conducted by a committee of the Wash- 
ington Chapter, А.А. 

February 6: “The Housing Exhibit Prepared 
for the Century of Progress Exposition, Chicago,” 
by Edward A. Rich. 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


OREGON CHAPTER MEETING 

The February 28th meeting of Oregon Chapter, 
А. I. A., was held at the ltalian Tavern, those 
present being Messrs. Crowell, Church, Hemen- 
way, Holford, Jacobberger, Johnson, Wallwork. 
Parker, Aandahl, Bean, Brookman, Sundeleaf, 
Doty and Howell. President Crowell presided. 
Minutes of the annual meeting were read and ap- 
proved. 

Mr. Aandahl reported for the Education Com- 
mittee in reference to the proposal of Mr. Brig- 
ham to start a class of instruction for architec- 
tural draftsmen. А motion was made and twice 
amended, after which an extended discussion en- 
sued. After the original motion had been with- 
drawn, it was moved by Mr. Aandahl, seconded 
by Hemenway and unanimously carried, that the 
entire matter be left with the executive committee, 
with power to act, and that the said committee 
take into consideration the points brought out in 
the discussion which were as follows: 

(1). The Chapter approves a temporary class 
for architectural] draftsmen as an emergency mea- 
sure only. 

(2). The Chapter to maintain supervision, se- 
lect the instructor, if a suitable one can be ob- 
tained, and determine the personnel as well as the 
qualifications required of students. 

Mr. Holford, chairman of the exhibition com- 
mittee, reported that in case the exhibition of 
building materials is held at the Central Market, 
it can probably be arranged with Mr. Sroufe, man- 
ager of the market, so the Chapter can secure 
space for an exhibit without cost. The report was 
accepted. 

Mr. Johnson read a letter from George Fred- 
erick Ashley, architect of San Francisco, asking 
that the Chapter support the proposed appoint- 
ment of Sullivan Jones of New York to the posi- 
tion of Supervising Architect, Treasury Depart- 
ment. 

Mr. Crowell read a letter from the Chicago 
Chapter asking for support for Alfred Granger, 
proposed for the position of Assistant Secretary 
of the Treasury in charge of Public Works. 

It was moved by Mr. Doty and carried that 
the Chapter communicate by wire with the Na- 
tional Chairman of the Legislative Committee, 
А. I. A., as to what course the Chapter should 
pursue and whom it should endorse for the posi- 
tions of Supervising Architect, Treasury Depart- 
ment, and Assistant Secretary of the Treasury in 
charge of Public Works. 

It was moved by Mr. Holford, seconded by Mr. 
Doty and carried, that Mr. Crowell confer with 
Mr. Murphy, President of the О, B. C., and if 
found necessary, send telegrams to members of 
the Oregon delegation in Congress, urging pas- 
sage of the Wagner Bill. —L. D. H. 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


SAN FRANCISCO ARCHITECTS MEET 

The February meeting of the Northern Cali- 
fornia Chapter, A.I.A., was held at Marquard's. 
San Francisco, John J. Donovan, presiding. ` 

Guests present were: Messrs. Adams, Hall, 
Hayne, Gould, Kierluff, Kruse and Mead. Mr. 
Donovan introduced the new members and guests. 

Mr. Bakewell reported for the Unemployment 
Committee and presented a program of ways and 
means to afford relief to needy draftsmen. The 
report was accepted. 

Mr. Evers, of the Bridge Consultants Commit- 
tee, reported progress to date in connection with 
the effort to have competent architectural consult- 
ants engaged for the San Francisco Bay Bridge. 
The report was accepted. 

Mr. Hall of John Roebling's Sons Company 
gave a talk on suspension bridges and showed 
motion pictures of the Washington Memorial 
Bridge. 

GRANTED CERTIFICATES TO PRACTICE 

At the regular meeting of the State Board of 
Architectural Examiners, Northern District, Feb- 
ruary 28, the following candidates were granted 
Provisional Certificates: 

Edwin Bradley Mead, 2618 Etna Street, Berke- 
ley; Edward John Maher, 3033 Wheeler Street, 
Berkeley; Edward W. Kress, 433 So. 12th Street, 
San Jose; James Donald Wickenden, 1408 Spring 
Way, Berkeley; Winfield Hadsell Hyde, 2458 
Vallejo Street, San Francisco. 

At the regular meeting of the State Board of 
Architectural Examiners, Southern District, Feb- 
ruary 28, Provisional Certificates were granted to 
the following: 

Charles Hugh Gibbs, 3128 "B" Theresa, Long 
Beach; Miss Irene Margaret McFaul, Rt. 1, Box 
88715, San Gabriel; Walter Chas. Wurdeman, 
1108 W. P. Story Building. Los Angeles. 

'The next written examinations for a Certificate 
to Practice Architecture will be held June 12-15 
inclusive. 


HONOLULU CHAPTER 

The Hawaii Chapter, American Institute of 
Architects, has named the following officers for 
the year 1933: 

President: Hart Wood, Hawaiian Trust Build- 
ing, Honolulu; Vice-President: Marcus C. Lester, 
Schuman Building, Honolulu; Secretary-Treasur- 
er: Herbert C. Cayton, Damon Building, Hono- 
lulu; Members of the Executive Committee; Ralph 
A. Fishbourne, Stangenwald Building, and Wil- 
liam C. Furer, Hawaiian Trust Building. 


ENGINEERS' EXAMINATION 
The semi-annual examinations for registration 
as civil engineers, and for the right to use the title 
"structural engineer" will be held in San Fran- 
cisco on April 20, 21, and 22; and in Los Angeles 
on April 27, 28, and 29. 


59 


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA CHAPTER 

Chapter business and proposed amendments to 
the State Housing Act were discussed at the 
monthly meeting of the Southern California Chap- 
ter, American Institute of Architects, February 21. 
Gordon B. Kaufmann, president, presided at the 
meeting. The following members and guests were 
present: R. H. Ainsworth, J. E. Allison, Claud 
Beelman, Edwin Bergstrom, Horatio W. Bishop, 
E. F. Bisantz, H. C. Chambers, Robert B. Cole- 
man, ]г., Paul J. Duncan, А. M. Edelman, В. D. 
Farquhar, Ralph C. Flewelling, Breo Freeman, 
Elmer Grey, J. Robert Harris, R. Germain Hubby, 
Paul R. Hunter, Jr., Gordon B. Kaufmann, John 
P. Krempel, Samuel E. Lunden, Donald McMur- 
ray, J. J. Miller, L. A. Parker, Jonathan Ring, 
W. Г. Risley, А. Е. Rosenheim, Floyd Rible, 
Palmer Sabin, Sumner Spaulding, W. F. Staun- 
ton, Jr., Loyall Е. Watson, Eugene Weston, ]т., 
G. Stanley Wilson, Carleton M. Winslow, David 
J. Witmer, J. T. Zeller and Mr. Putnam. 


FOURTH ARCHITECT'S INSTITUTE 

The fourth annual Institute for Architects, 
sponsored by Washington State College, was 
held in Spokane, February 25th. Anm interesting 
program was carried out, some of the topics under 
discussion being “New Trends in Structural Uses 
of Lumber," by Chester J. Hogue who is in charge 
of trade extension and technical service for the 
West Coast Lumbermen’s Association; ‘Business 
Forecasting Methods Employed and What May 
be Expected in Our Own Case,” by Gordon F. 
Cadisch; "Modern Developments in Ventilating,” 
by G. E. Thornton, and an illustrated lecture on 
“Late Trends in Small House Architecture,” Бу 
Harry C. Weller. 


REDRAFT BUILDING CODE 

Redrafting of Seattle’s building code during the 
lull in construction activity is advocated by A. M. 
Young, architect and engineer, member of the 
architectural firm of Schack and Young, with 
office in the Central Building, Seattle. Adjust- 
ment of control methods to new types of con- 
struction evolved during the last few years is 
deemed essential to the full protection of the 
owner and the public. 


BILL AFFECTS ARCHITECTS 

Enactment of a law providing that all buildings 
erected in Oregon be checked by a licensed arch- 
itect, is proposed in a bill brought before the 
Oregon Legislature by Representative Paget and 
Dammasch of Multonomah County. The measure 
provides for a state board of five architects to be 
named by the governor. 


60 


WIN MENTION IN CONTEST 

Three California architects were given honor- 
able mention by the jury of award for designs 
submitted in the small house architectural competi- 
tion of 1932, sponsored by Better Homes in Amer- 
ica, a national organization. 

Royal Barry Wills, architect of Boston, was 
awarded the gold medal for the prize-winning 
design. 

The California architects were among seven re- 
ceiving honorable mention. They are William 
Wilson Wurster, San Francisco, who received 
first place in the two-story class for his design 
of the home of Dr. Alister Mackenzie, near Santa | 
Cruz; Leland F. Fuller, who placed first in the 
one-story class for his own residence at Santa 
Monica, and Ralph C. Flewelling, Beverly Hills, 
who was also awarded honorable mention in the 
one-story class for designing the house of Dr. 
Seeley G. Mudd in Sandyland Cove, Santa Bar- 
bara county. 

Photographs of the prize winning design and 
the California houses that received mention will 
be published in the April number of THE Авсн- 
ITECT AND ENGINEER. 


ARCHITECTURAL EXAMINATION 

Examination of candidates for licenses to prac- 
tice architecture in the State of Oregon were held 
February 13th to 16th, inclusive, in the Public 
Library Building, Portland. The program of sub- 
jects as announced by Mrs. Margaret Goodin 
Fritsch, secretary of the Oregon State Board of 
Architect Examiners, was as follows: First day 
—Theory of Architecture and History of Archi- 
tecture. Second day—Architectural design. Third 
day — Materials and Specifications for General 
Contractor, Plumbing, Heating, Wiring and 
Ventilating. Fourth day—Strength of Materials 
and Structural Engineering. 


TO BUILD 25 COTTAGES 

Hubert A. Williams, architectural designer with 
office in Commerce Building, Portland, is pre- 
paring sketches for the immediate construction 
of four cottages for the Oreqon Highway Home 
Company, on the Lower Columbia Highway at 
Burlington, a community 12 miles northwest of 
Portland. The company expects to erect 25 cot- 
tages on the tract during the year. 


COMPETITION FOR COVER DESIGN 

The House Beautiful magazine has announced 
its eleventh cover design competition, open to all 
artists everywhere. Prizes will be offered as fol- 
icws: first prize, $500; second prize, $300; a spe- 
cial student prize of $250. In addition to the 
prizes several of the designs will be purchased for 
$200 each. The competition closes May 4th. 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


OVER THE DRAUGHTING BOARD 
They want a plan to build a flat 
They want a this, they want a that, 
But just right now I'd like to tell 
The cockeyed world to go to hell. 
She points "A light plug over here." 
(ГП bet he'd join me in a beer.) 
"A Spanish roof but English house." 
(She'd mate an elephant with a louse. 
"Now we worked hard and saved our money." 
( Heard that so much it's getting funny.) 
"You did the Jonses' but then they're rich" 
( You know the kind; high nasal pitch.) 
"But us, we have our plans all here." 
(An envelope and pencilled smear.) 
"Pointed china once. Quite nice." 
(Oh Yeh, I painted Russia twice.) 
"You wouldn't charge the usual fee 
"Counting our publicity. 
"If we come here our friends will too." 
(A little selling yet to do.) 
"No supervisor need be hired, 
"] have an uncle who's retired. 
"For fixtures go to Zipper and Zounds. 


“Му niece who land'scapes planned the grounds. 


"Our neighbour runs a lumber yard, 

"We wouldn't want that friendship marred. 
"The painting goes to Oldenbluff, 

"He did all of my uncle's stuff. 

"So Mr. Glubb you surely see 

“To save at all must mean your fee." 


* * ж 


Now that's the way one might have talked. 
But here's the way the prey was stalked. 


ж ж ж 


І see you know where light plugs go. 

The roof... well пом... mind if I show 
Sketches that I think would make 

Your flat the show place of Shore Lake? 

If I may mention . . . you don't mind? 
Most of my clients are your kind: 

The kind who work and save yet give 

А fair deal so we all can live. 

When your friends come here the fee 
Will be the same you're paying me. 
Publicity from you I know 

Is bound to make my business grow. 
There is a secret hope of mine 

Each year to have the prize design. 

If you can help me plan this flat 

I'm sure this year we'll capture that. 

You painted china! Well, well, well. 

In luck again. Not hard to tell 

You have good taste. Your choice of men 
To build the place . . . you're right again. 
They're all good subs. The painter though. 
He died you know, some years ago. 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


Well now we've settled on the fee 
Have you a check . . . yes, just to me. 
And sign this slip . . no over here. 
(I'm right. Already had his beer.) 
lH study this а day or two, 
Some pencil sketches . . . then 'phone for you 
Don't mention #..... I surely will! 
Good day! Oh boy! Is that a kill? 
—Har MELYREN. 


NO INSTITUTE CONVENTION 

The board of directors of the American Insti- 
tute of Architects, has voted unanimously to omit 
the 66th convention of the Institute which was 
scheduled to take place in Washington, D. C., 
May 10 to 12 inclusive. 

In reaching this decision the directors were gov- 
erned by a number of reasons, including the fol- 
lowing: 

"First. In common with practically every busi- 
ness and professional organization, the Institute 
finds that it must operate in 1933 with a drastic- 
ally reduced insome. Из budgets for 1931 and 
1932 were adjusted to income and the same policy 
must be followed in 1933. 

"Second. By omitting the convention a saving 
of Institute money usually required for convention 
expenses will be affected, to the extent of approxi- 
mately $3,000, not including certain miscellan- 
eous expenses that usually accrue. 

"Third. 'The assessment of convention taxes on 
the Chapters will be avoided, and all of the Chap- 
ters relieved of a direct convention expense. Al- 
though there is a refund later on, the convention 
taxes bear heavily on many of the Chapters, and 
it was believed that they should be relieved of 
the burden. In addition, there will result very 
substantial savings to individual members of the 
Institute who normally attend conventions, and 
that saving, even under the abnormal conditions 
of the present year, will undoubtedly amount to a 
total of some $15,000. 

"Fourth. By omitting the convention, it is pos- 
sible to take some of the money saved from the 
convention appropriation on the Institute budget 
and allocate it to two appropriations — one of 
$1,500, to meet the expenses of directors in visit- 
ing their Chapters: and another of $1,000, to send 
the officers to visit Chapters and Divisions where 
they can be of special value at this time. 

"It was the well considered opinion of the Board 
that more can be accomplished at this time for the 
solidarity of the Institute, and the maintenance of 
its Chapters at a high point of efficiency, by send- 
ina the Institute to the Chapters—by means of 
visits of officers and directors—than by bringing 
a few delegates to Washington during the month 
of May.” 


61 


62 


| THE 
FOUNDATION 


PROBLEMS 


in 


San Francisco 


Are described by a committee 
of distinguished engineers in a 
valuable book just published 
ө by the ө 


SAN FRANCISCO SECTION 
AMERICAN SOCIETY 
OF CIVIL ENGINEERS 


С No architect or engineer 
should be without this com- 
plete and dependable analysis 
of the soil conditions in the 
San Francisco Bay Region. Sev- 
eral years were consumed in 
compiling data and preparing 
this report. 


С Copies of the book may be 
procured from the secretary 
treasurer: 


* e 


HAROLD B. HAMMILL 
381 BUSH STREET SAN FRANCISCO 


The price is ө 


$6.00 


TRAVEL SKETCHES IN THE OLD 


BOOK REVIEWS 


Dy Сара N Кени 


WORLD, Бу Woodruff К. Aykroyd. Pub- 
lished by Thomas S. Rockwell Co., Chicago 
Price $5.00. 

A nicely done portfolio of sketches made in 


England, Brittany and Normandy. The sketches 
on the continent embrace bits from the principal 
cities and towns in Normandy and in Brittany. 
There is a page of English Inn signs and two 
or three interesting half timbered churches among 
the drawings made in England. The book on 
the whole, however, does not, in the opinion of 
the reviewer, merit a price of five dollars. There 
are too many books of European sketches by 
traveling architects and etchers whose work has 
on the whole greater claim to distinction. 


ARCHITECTURAL ACOUSTICS by Vern O. 
Knudsen, Ph.D. Associate Professor of Phys- 
ics, University of California. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, шс., New York. Price 
$6.50. 

A very complete and thoroughly technical 


treatise on acoustics from the standpoint of its 
relation to architecture, embracing every type of 
building in which acoustics are an essential and 
important factor. The modern architect will find 
this a valuable guide in practice. 

The author of this book is an accepted author- 
ity on acoustics. The latest theoretical and prac- 
tical applications of the laws governing the trans- 
mission of sound in buildings, are discussed and 
the book is well illustrated and diagrammed. 


TRADE LITERATURE 

The Westinghouse Electric © Manufacturing 
Company of East Pittsburgh has issued a limited 
number of "Engineering Achievements of 1932." 
a highly interesting brochure of some of the out- 
standing installations and major equipment jobs 
completed or put underway last year. И is pro- 
fusely illustrated. 


The American Leather Belting Association, 41 
Park Row, New York City, announces the publi- 
cation of the Drake Reports on Mechanical Power 
Transmission from Motor Drive to Industry. This 
will be a subscription edition, according to the 


announcement. 
ж * * 


The [deal Electric & Manufacturing Company 
of Mansfield, Ohio, has just released an interest- 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


ing bulletin descriptive of из Ideal "Self-Syn" 
Motors. Bulletin No. 540 completely describes the 
motor and gives characteristics and dimensional 
charts with a short word on power factor cor- 
rection. 

À short, concise brochure has recently been is- 
sued by the Republic Steel Corporation of Youngs- 
town, Ohio, containing pressure and weight tables 
descriptive of an electric weld drive pipe and 
casing, as well as a nicely illustrated booklet on 
"Enduro", a perfected stainless steel for building 
use and decoration. All data pertaining to this 
steel is herein contained together with illustra- 
tions of some of the specific installations made. 


“REVOLUTIONARY” METHOD IN WOOD 
JOIST CONSTRUCTION 

Introduction in this country of a "revolution- 
ary" method of making wood joints through use 
of metal connectors, strengthening timber at its 
critical point and thereby making it available for 
wider consideration in construction of major struc- 
tures, is forecast in a handbook on "Modern Con- 
nectors for Timber Construction" issued by the 
National Committee on Wood Utilization, U. S. 
Department of Commerce, and prepared jointly 
by engineers of the Committee and of the Forest 
Products Laboratory, ll. S. Forest Service De- 
partment of Agriculture. 


Lumber, construction, and metal stamping and 
casting interests, as well as architectural and engi- 
neering circles, it has been reported have been 
awaiting this report with unusual interest through 
its several years of preparation. The new prac- 
tices it makes available for engineering use should 
result in marked economy in construction, serve 
as a stimulant to the advantageous investment of 
capital therein, and prove an innovation and a 
boon in several special fields to which it wil! afford 
new avenues for activity and development. "The 
application of ‘Modern Connectors for Timber 
Construction’. said Secretary of Commerce Chapin 
in releasing the report, "should be given careful 
study by architects, engineers, and builders. The 
principle involves economy in construction cost 
and increased service from building materials." 


The handbook, "Modern Connectors for Tim- 
ber Construction" constitutes a re-introduction 
into this country, in modern, usable form and 
under economically favorable circumstances, of 
construction principles which were abandoned in 
embryonic and vaguely developed stages nearly 
half a century ago. Аз a result of war-enforced 
construction economies, these principles were 
adopted and advanced by engineers and con- 
structors in the Central European and Scandi- 
navian countries to the point where they have 


The Architect and Engincer, March, 1933 


What made this man 


want to build? 


HY are people building houses ts- 
day —when they could buy already- 
built honses at less-than-bacgain prices? 


Isn't it because they have been educated 
to want moce than any of the existing 
“bargain houses" can give them? 


The electrical industry has directed a 
good deal of thought toward the present 
huilding situation. 


It believes that more homes will be 
built if more people can be made dissatis- 
fied with their present dwellings. And 
propec, adequate lighting uffers great op- 
portunity for improvement. 


And so the electric industcy is directing 
every effort towards educating more peo- 
ple to want modern, well-lighted homes. 
The intelligent cooperation of architects, 
contractors and building supply factor: 
ean speed this educational program tre- 
mendously, 


The Pacific Coast Electrical Bureau is 
interested in disenssing any idea that may 
lead to more sonnd new building. Visit or 
write our office nearest yon any time you 
wish. 


Paciric Coast ELECTICAL BUREAU, an impartial, non-profit organi- 
zation supported by all branches of the electrical industry os an 
adrisory bureau to serre users of electricity. 447 Sutter St, San 
Francisco; 601 W. 5th St., Los Angeles; 818 Roosevelt St., Fresno. 


€ A SUGGESTION e 


Suppose you specify the most 
modern lighting fixtures and 
lighting outlets in every house 
plan you draw up frum now on. 
This will not only please your 
clients, assure them a home that 
will stay modern, and avoid 


later, more сөзі іу, rewiring ex- 


pense — but will help make 
present. day homes old-fash- 
ioned. And there уои sow the 
seeds of шосе business for 
yourself. This Bureau will 
gladly furnish you authorita- 
tive information on electrical 
plans, specifications and recom- 
mendations — without charge. 


63 


BUILD 
WELL -= 


PROPERLY designed and well built 
building is a credit to any city and 


a worth while investment for its owner. 


Such structures are the STAND- 
ARD Оп, Вопріхс, MATSON 
Воспогхс, Four-Firry SUT- 
TER STREET, STOCK EXCHANGE, 
S. Е. Base Barr Park, Мил.5 
Tower, Opera House апа 
VETERANS MeEmoriaAL and 
other notable structures — all 


built or supervised by — 


Lindgren & Swinerton, Inc. 


Standard Oil Building 
San Francisco 


Stanley 
Ball Bearing Hinges 


FOR smooth, trouble-free operation of 
doors for the life of the building. 


You will find our ‘Architect's Man- 
ual of Stanley Hardware” very 
useful in making up hardware 
specifications. Send for a copy. 


THE STANLEY WORKS 
New Britain, Conn. 
SAN FRANCISCO 
576 Manadnock Bldg. 


LOS ANGELES 
1202 Washingtan Bldg. 


SEATTLE 
501 Maynard Bldg. 


©) 


64 


been satisfactorily and economically employed in 
hundreds of wood-built buildings and major en- 
gineering projects. 

The connectors which they employ consist prin- 
cipally of metal rings, plates, and disks, of a. 
dowel type or semi-dowel with teeth on one or 
both faces. In general and in no-technical langu- 
age the connectors are placed or forced into the 
faces of wooden members to be joined. The mem- 
bers are then brought together and held by the 
accustomed bolt, but the bolt becomes primarily 
a binder and only secondarily a load bearing unit. 
With their larger circumferences, these connectors 
take an increased load and distribute it over a 
larger area of the timbers, thus avoiding the un- 
distributed unit "edge stresses" frequently exper- 
ienced under bolted connections where the small 
diameter bolt played against a localized area 
of the timber face, crushing the timber at this 
point, and, together with bent bolts, accounting 
for slip with consequent sag in structures. Thus, 
on most conservative laboratory data, the load- 
bearing capacity of the joint is increased from 4 
to 8 times—and in certain cases as high as twelve 
times—that of the ordinary bolted joint. 

'The new method is compared by engineers, and 
even more favorably, with the advance from the 
ancient hand or cut framing to that of the bolted 
joint. It has been described by Wilson Compton, 
President, American Forest Products Industries, 
and leading economist of the lumber industry, as 
the "most important advance in wood technique 
in more than a hundred years." F. Leo Smith, 
technical secretary, American Institute of Archi- 
tects, has written that it will “undoubtedly open 
new fields for the efficient use of wood in many 
types of construction”. B. L. Knowles, leading 
New England construction engineer who served 
on a special sponsoring committee as representa- 
tive of the Associated General Contractors, ob- 
serves the new connecting methods with “a large 
vision of the value of this work in future construc- 
tion projects". Other engineers have described 
the innovation as "revolutionary" and bound to 
lead to a new conception by architects and engi- 
neers of the place of wood in construction. 

There are some sixty odd types of modern con- 
nectors used abroad, of which some six or eight 
are considered important to American practice. 
No one type will meet all engineering require- 
ments, but it will seldom be necessary to go be- 
yond one or two types for a given construction 
project. 

Pre-fabrication, similar to that employed in the 
use of other structural materials, becomes a nat- 
ural step in the preparation of wood members 
for use with the new system. Seatings and bor- 
ings for the connecting hardware will be made 
with precision tools at the shop according to spec- 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


ifications, where the standards of materials them- 
selves can also be checked against requirements 
by experts. Partly assembled and assembled units 
will be shipped ready for speedy erection. Where 
intended use requires preservative treatment, this 
will be given after the borings have exposed new 
surfaces. 

The wide use of these connectors abroad first 
came to the attention of American industry 
through Axel H. Oxholm, of the Department of 
Commerce, toward the close of the War, who 
picked the fact up from German prisoners while 
on duty in France. As Director of the National 
Committee on Wood Utilization. he has since fol- 
lowed the matter closely for the Department, 
bringing back, after several protracted investiga- 
tions abroad, all available European information 
on the subject. On his last visit in 1931 Mr. Ox- 
holm viewed in excess of 100 major engineering 
structures in which wood had proven suitable as 
the principal structural material as a result of the 
use of modern connectors. 


SIGNATURES ON PLANS 

Plans and specifications filed in the office of the 
Department of Building and Safety of the city of 
Los Angeles must be "personally signed" by a 
licensed architect or a civil engineer having a cer- 
tihcate of authority to use the title "structural 
engineer," according to the provisions of Ordin- 
ance No. 72,265 amending Section 31 of the city 
building code known as Ordinance No. 28.700. 
Exceptions are made to single and double dwell- 
ings which do not cost more than $7500, altera- 
tions and additions which do not cost more than 
$5000 and other buildings and structures which 
wil not cost more than $1000. The ordinance 
became effective February 17th. Following is the 


text of the section as amended: 


Sec. 3%. ARCHITECT OR STRUCTURAL ENGI- 
NEER REQUIRED. (a) Every plan and/or drawing, and 
every sheet thereof, and every set of specifications therefor, 
filed in the office of the Department of Building and Safety 
for the erection, construction, adding to, alteration and/or 
repair of auy building, shall be personally signed by an 
architect holding a certificate to practice architecture in the 
State of California, as provided in an act of said state, 
known as, "An act to regulate the practice of architecture," 
approved March 23, 1901, as amended, of the State of Cali- 
fornia. except when and as otherwise hereinafter provided 
in this section. 

(b) Any such plan, drawing, and every sheet thereof. 
and every set of specifications therefor, may be personally 
signed by a person holding a certificate to practice civil 
engineering in the State of California. provided that such 
person also holds a certificate or authority from said state 
to use the title "Structural Engineer," as provided in an act 
of the State of California, known as, “Ап act regulating the 
practice of civil engineering," approved June 14, 1929, as 
amended: and/or as provided in an act of said state known 
as "An act to regulate the practice of architecture," ap- 
proved March 23, 190], as amended: provided, that such 
person uses the title of "Structural Engineer" on such plans. 
drawings and/or sets of specifications. 

(c) No such signature shall be required for any plan. 
drawing and/or specification for any structure not having 
a roof, and/or for any structure which is not designed, in- 
tended and/or used for the purpose of housing persons. 
goods and/or chattels, provided that such plan, drawing 
and/or set of specifications is personally signed by a duly 


The Architect and Engineer, March. 1933 


“ЕНЕ MANHATTAN” 


The New Wall Type 
Haws Drinking Founiain 


Model 7 F 


А Modern Design for Modern Needs 


Selected by Associated Oil Co. and 
Specified by Masten & Hurd, 
Architects, on all their 
ASSOCIATED OIL 


Stations 
Manufactured by 


Haws Sanitary Drinking Fountain Co. 


1808 HARMON STREET, BERKELEY 


THE CUTLER 
MAIL CHUTE 


TO INSURE standard, depend- 
able equipment installed prompt- 
ly at moderate cost, the Cutler 
Mail Chute should be specified 
by name. If desired, approxi- 
mate estimates will be furnished 
in advance. 


If preferred, a stated sum may 
be allowed to cover this item. 


Full information on request. 


PRICE BUILDING SPECIALTIES, 
San Francisco, California 


B. L. WILCOX, BUILDING SPECIALTIES, 
2071 Laura Ave., Huntington Pk., Los Angeles, Cal. 
р. Е. FRYER & COMPANY, С. W. BOOST, 

Seattle, Washington Portland, Oregon 
FRYER-FORD COMPANY, 
Spokane, Washington 


CUTLER MAILCHUTE CO. 


General Offices and Factory 
ROCHESTER, NEW YORK 


MONEL METAL 


[High Nickel Alloy] | 


is the accepted material for soda foun- 
tains and lunch-room equipment, just as 
itis the universal metal for food service 
equipment in leading hotels and restau- 
rants throughout the country. 


Ф 
CORROSIRON 


[Acid Resisting Iron] 


is the accepted material for draining 
waste lines. CORROSIRON meets all 
State and Municipal specifications for 
drain lines from school laboratories and 
chemistry rooms. 


Pacific Foundry Company Ltd. 
Pacific Metals Company Ltd. 


470 East Third St. 
LOS ANGELES 


3100 Nineteenth St. 
SAN FRANCISCO 


551 Fifth Ave. 
NEW YORK 


HEATING ° COOKING 


WATER HEATING * REFRIGERATION 


Quick Clean Economical 


the modern fuel 


Satisfies owners... 
... pleases tenants 


IF YOU HAVE 


Worked out the solution of an 


ARCHITECTURAL PROBLEM 


And want patent protection for the same, write 
me for an opinion on the probable patentability 
and an estimate of the cost. 


JI. KAPLAN 


Washington Loan & Trust Bldg. 


Washington, D. C. 
Registered Patent Attorney 


66 


licensed civil engineer, either holding or not holding author- 
ity to use the term "Structural Engineer," except when and 
as otherwise hereinafter provided in this section. 

(d) In lieu of personally signing a plan and/or drawing, 
and each sheet thereof, as hereinbefore required in this sec- 
tion, the name of the architect and/or structural engineer 
may be lettered, printed and/or stamped on the original 
tracing and/or drawing, and reproduced by blue printing 
and/or similar method on the copies made from such original 
tracing aud/or drawing. 

(e) In every case the personal signature of the architect 
and/or structural engineer shall be affixed to the cover, or 
the title page, or to the first page, of each set of specifica- 
tions required to be signed by this section. 

(f) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any 
plan, drawing and/or specification for a building used ex- 
clusively as a one or two family dwelling, including the 
accessory buildings and/or structures for any such dwelling, 
in the event that the total value of such dwelling when com- 
pleted will not exceed seven thousand five hundred ($7,500) 
dollars. 

(g) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any 
plan, drawing and/or specification for any building and/or 
structure, in the event that the total value of such building 
or structure when completed will not exceed one thousand 
($1,000) dollars. 

(h) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any 
plan, drawing and/or specification for additions, alterations, 
repairs, and/or other work to be done to any building or 
structure, in the event that the total value of such additions, 
alterations, repairs and/or other work when completed, for 
any one such building, will not exceed a value of five thou- 
sand ($5,000) dollars. 

(i) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any 
plan and/or drawing for the installation of fixtures, appli- 
ances, apparatus, appurtenances, machinery and/or equip- 
ment, in, on and/or for any building or structure. 

(j) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any 
plan апа/ог drawing which does not include any architec- 
tural design and/or any structural engineering. 

(k) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed or 
construed to authorize or permit any person, firm and/or 
corporation to violate any provision of the acts of the State 
of California mentioned in subsection (a) and/or (b) of this 
section, nor to authorize or permit the making and/or prep- 
aration of any specification, instrument of service or other 
data in violation of either of said acts as amended. 

(1) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any 
plan, drawing, specification, instrument of service and/or 
other data prepared by the government of the LInited States. 
the State of California, the County of Los Angeles, the City 
of Los Angeles and/or to any department, bureau, division, 
office, and/or employee thereof, when acting in an official 
capacity therefor. 

(m) Whenever it shall come to the attention of the 
Board of Building and Safety Commissioners, or any duly 
authorized representative of said board that any such certifi- 
cate to practice architecture, or to practice civil engineering 
and/or any such certificate or authority to use the title 
"Structural Engineer," or to practice structural engineering. 
has been suspended, revoked and/or has expired, the said 
board or representative is hereby authorized and empow- 
ered to refuse to accept and/or approve any plan, drawing 
and/or specification signed by and/or bearing the name of 
the person holding any such certificate, unless satisfactory 
evidence is submitted to said board or representative estab- 
lishing the fact that such plan drawing and/or specification 
was completed before the date of such suspension, revoca- 
tion and/or expiration. 


SPRINKLER COMPANY OPENS OFFICE 

The Rockwood Sprinkler Company announces 
the opening of a branch office at 7 Front Street. 
San Francisco, Al Fryer, manager. Mr. Fryer 
has previously been in charge of other offices of 
this company and has had a wide experience as 
a sprinkler engineer. 

In maintaining an office in San Francisco the 
Rockwood Company is in a position to give prompt 
and complete service to the concerns at present 
having Rockwood devices in their properties, as 
well as to those buying new equipment. 


Thc Architect and Engincer, March, 1933 


BILLS IN LEGISLATURE AFFECTING 
ARCHITECTURE AND ENGINEERING 


Many bills affecting the professions of archi- 
tecture and engineering, the Board of Registration 
for Civil Engineers and the Department of Pro- 
fessional and Vocational Standards, have been in- 
troduced in the California Legislature. А digest 
of these bills, prepared by Pecos H. Calahan, 
assistant secretary of the Board of Registration 
for Civil Engineers, is presented herewith. 


Civil Engineering Profession — (Referred to 
Committee on County Government). This bill re- 
peals the County Engineers' Act. Approved May 
27, 1919, which has since been declared uncon- 
stitutional. Ref. Coulter vs. Pool, 187 Cal. 181, 
201, Pac. 120. 


Seawell—( Committee on County Government). 
Ап Act adding eleven sections to the political code 
providing for the appointment of a county road 
superintendent, who shall be a civil engineer. 
(Should be amended to read: "A person lawfully 
registered in the State of California to practice 
civil engineering." ) 

A county road superintendent, under this Act 
would in reality become the county engineer; he 
would not, however, assume the functions of the 
county surveyor. This Act also provides for the 
repeal of the County Engineers’ Act (See A. B. 
77). 

County Engineer—(Committee on County Gov- 
ernment). This bill will create in each county the 
office of county engineer, who must be a person 
lawfully registered in the State of California to 
practice civil engineering, and must have had 
within five years next preceding his appointment 
at least one year's actual experience in highway 
construction. The county engineer, the bill pro- 
vides, shall become county surveyor, and the office 
of county surveyor abolished. Provision is also 


made for abolishing the county engineers Act. 
(See A. B. 77). 


This bill is similar in intent to S. B. 36, which 
provides for the appointment of a county road 
superintendent, but does not abolish the office of 
county surveyor. 


Registration for Civil Engineers— ( Committee 
on Judiciary). This bill provides for three amend- 
ments to the Act regulating the practice of civil 
engineering as follows: Section 11, relating to 
reciprocal registration; increases the registration 
fee for registered engineers from other states from 
$5.00 to $10.00, and generally rewords the sec- 
tion to conform with the section on reciprocal reg- 
istration in the model law, sponsored by the 
founder engineering societies; Sec. 12, to provide 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


1044-1058 Forty-seventh Avenue 


OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 
Telephone: FR uitvale 8305-8306 


CALIFORNIA SHADE CLOTH CO. 


1710 San Bruno Avenue, San Francisco 
Manufacturers of 


QUALITY HAND MADE SHADE CLOTH 
IN ALL GRADES 


W'holesale Distributors 
SLOANE-BLABON LINOLEUM 


Pump Governors 

Safety Pump Governors 

Automatic Gas Regulat- 
ing Valves 

Gas Burners 


Gas Burning Equipment 
Vacuum Pump Governors 


Vacuum Regulating 


Oil Heaters 

Relief Valves 

Oil-Burner Governors 

Little Giant Improved 
Qi! Burnera 

Oil Pumping Seis 

Oil Valves 

Oi! Strainers 


Valves 
Continuous Flow Steam 
raps 
Thermostata 
Reducing Valves 
Boiler Feed-Water 
Regulators 


VAUGHN. G. E. WITT CO., Engineers 
С. W. VAUGHN, President and Manager 
MANUFACTURERS AND DISTRIBUTORS 


4224-28 Hollis St. Phone OL ymple 6084 
Emeryville, Oakland, Calif. 


Steam Gil! Strainers 
Duplex Oil Pumps 
Rotary Oi! Pumpa 
Boiler Feed Pumpa 
Water Heaters 

Oil Meters 


VENETIAN BLINDS 


Control light and air without 
draft or glare 


For public buildings, 
offices, stores and homes, 
in colors to suit. 


GUNN, CARLE & CO. 


San Francisco UNderhill 5480 


20 Potrero Ave. 


67 


The new Decatur 
De Luxe Lavatory, 
illustrated here, is 
representative of 
the MUELLER 
line of quality vit- 
reous china. 


MUELLER СО. 
Decatur, 111. 
San Francisco Branch: 
1072-76 Howard St. 


The Modern Way— 
BUILD WITH STEEL 


Protect your Investment from 
Fire and Quake 
Structural Steel for Buildings 


and Bridges 


JUDSON-PACIFIC CO. 


609 MISSION STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 
DOuglas 4460 


Plants, San Francisco and Oakland 


MARBLE CLASS 


A new decorative building material of 

exceptional beauty—looks like genuine 

marble with its innumerable delicate 
veins and royal colors. 


Г For New and Remodeled Build- 
Cr ings, Store Fronts, Hotel Lobbies, 1 


Office Buildings, Vestibules, Etc. 


MaeGRUER & COMPANY 


266 Tehama Street San Francisco 


W.8 J. SLOANE 


Established 1843 


RUGS : CARPETS 
LINOLEUMS 
WINDOW SHADES 
Phone: GArfield 2827 
FURNITURE 


DRAPERIES 
Estimates Gladly Submitted 


216-228 SUTTER STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 


68 


for service of charges and complaints by either 
personal service or registered mail; Sec. 13, to 
provide that certificates of registration may be re- 
newed after June 30 of each year only by the pay- 
ment of the annual fee plus a penalty of $1.00 for 
each calendar month or fraction thereof. The ag- 
gregate amount of penalty that may be assessed 
shall not exceed $5.00 in any calendar year. 


Structural Engineer—( Committee on Judiciary). 
This bill amends the Act regulating the practice 
of civil engineering. Section (1b) relating to the 
title "Structural Engineer" is the only section in- 
volved. The amendment reads: "Application for 
permission to use the title 'structural engineer' 
shall be made to the board and shall be accom- 
panied by a fee of ten ($10.00) dollars; said fee 
to be retained by the board." 


Engineers апа Architects—( Committee on Ju- 
diciary). This bill amends the Act regulating the 
practice of Architecture. It provides that all build- 
ings hereafter erected in the state shall have plans 
and specifications prepared by an architect, and 
the erection shall also be under the supervision of 
an architect, except that "nothing in the Act shall 
prohibit the preparation of plans or specifications 
or the supervision of the erection of buildings by 
a structural engineer in the practice of his pro- 
fession, if he is expressly authorized by law to 
perform such acts, or if he has first passed an ex- 
amination given by three persons selected by the 
California State Board of Architecture from a list 
of five names submitted by the American Society 
of Civil Engineers, or other similar National Engi- 
neering Society." 

The bill defines the practice of architecture and 
the term building. 

Amendments to Act — (Committee on Judici- 
ary). This bill amends sections 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 
and 9 of an "Act to regulate the practice of Ar- 
chitecture." The only amendment in which the 
engineering profession is concerned is section 9, 
which, as amended reads: “Тһе words ‘structural 
engineer, as used in this Act shall mean a person 
who holds a certificate or license to practice struc- 
tural engineering in the State of California by 
authority of a state law." 

Housing Act—( Committee on Judiciary). This 
bill amends sections 7, 30 and 65 of the State 
Housing Act. One amendment in particular is of 
interest to the engineering profession, namely, a 
new paragraph which has been added to section 
7, reading: “АП plans and specifications as herein 
required for apartment houses or hotels must be 
prepared by a certificated architect holding a valid 
license under the State Act Regulating the Prac- 
tice of Architecture, or by a structural engineer 
duly qualified under said Act, and the supervision 
of the actual construction thereof shall be under 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


the responsible charge of such certificated archi- 
tect or a structural engineer." 


The second new paragraph added to section 7, 
provides that, upon completion of a project, the 
architect or structural engineer shall certify that 
said structure was designed by him and that it 
was constructed in conformance with provisions 
of the State Housing Act. 


Land Surveyors — (Committee on Judiciary). 
This is a new bill to regulate land surveying. It 
provides that the Board of Registration for Civil 
Engineers shall administer the provisions of the 
Act; which requires every person practicing or 
offering to practice land surveying in this state to 
be licensed, as a land surveyor or a registered 
civil engineer; it repeals the existing law under 
which land surveyors are now licensed; it pro- 
vides that any person who now holds an unre- 
voked license as a land surveyor, issued under the 
existing law, may, upon the payment of a fee of 
$5.00 on or before June 30, 1934, be issued a 
license without examination; after June 30, 1934, 
all applicants for license will be required to take 
an examination, the examination fee being $15.00, 
and the fee for a certificate after an applicant has 
successfully passed an examination is fixed at $10; 
the annual renewal fee is placed at $5.00, with a 
maximum penalty of $5.00 for delinquency; regis- 
tered civil engineers licensed as land surveyors 
are not required to pay the $5.00 renewal fee; it 
sets up procedure for examinations, hearings, etc., 
and defines the duties of land surveyors. 


(Committee on Judiciary). This bill amends 
section 8, of the existing law regulating land sur- 
veying by exempting "cor-partnerships" or "other 
political subdivisions" from certain provisions re- 
lating to retracing or subdivision of cemetery or 
town lots. 


(Committee on Governmental Efficiency). This 
bill amends section 8 of the Act regulating land 
surveying by adding the following sentence "and 
said licensed surveyors and his employees may 
enter upon lands to make examinations, surveys 
and maps thereof, and such entry shall constitute 
nc cause for action in favor of the owner of the 
lend, except for injuries resulting from negligence, 
wantonness, or malice." 


Professional and Vocational Standards— ( Com- 
mittee on Ways and Means). This is an Act to 
abolish the Department of Professional and Voca- 
ticnal Standards, and all boards under the juris- 
diction of said department, and to transfer all 
powers and duties of said boards to other depart- 
ments as follows: To the Health Department: 
Boards of Barber Examiners, Cosmetology. Den- 
tal Examiners, Embalmers, Medical Examiners, 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


ARCHITECTS, We Specialize in 
SOUND CONTROL 
and 
Insulation Materials 


Е. К. WOOD LUMBER СО. 
Lumber and Millwork 


SAN FRANCISCO - OAKLAND - LOS ANGELES 


Recent Contracts Completed— 


FORD ASSEMBLY PLANTS AT 
SEATTLE, LONG BEACH 
AND RICHMOND 


Clinton Construction Company 


of California 


Builders and Managers 
of Construction 


923 FOLSOM STREET SAN FRANCISCO 
Telephone SUtter 3440 


KAWNEER 


MODERNISTIC CONSTRUCTION 
FOR 


Торлу’5 STORE FRONT 


Through years of experience Kawneer 
craftsmen have acquired the art of ren- 
dering in metal distinctive and efficient 
store fronts of any size or design. 


KAWNEER MFG. CO. 


BERKELEY CALIFORNIA 


Optometry, Pharmacy and Veterinary Medical 
Examiners; To the Department of Finance, The 
Board of Accountancy; and to the Department of 
Public Works, the Board of Architectural Exam- 
iners, Board of Registration for Civil Engineers 
and the Registrar of Contractors. 


ORINDA COUNTRY HOUSE 
Newsom and Newsom, architects, Russ Build- 
ing, San Francisco, have prepared plans for a 
brick veneer residence in Orinda, Contra Costa 
County, for L. P. Dodson, 747 Walker Street, 
Oakland. The house will cost about $7,500. 


69 


JUHNSON 
OIL BURNERS:« 
For use in Commercial and 


Industrial Buildings, Apart- 


ment Houses and Homes. 


e 
S. T. Johnson Со. 


Main Office and Factory 
940-950 Arlington St., Oakland 


STRUCTURAL STEEL 


WESTERN IRON WORKS 
141-147 BEALE STREET 
132-148 MAIN STREET 


San Francisco Phone DAvenport 2575 


BOILERS 
for 
Every Purpose 


637 Minna Street, San Francisco, Calif. 
Phone: MArket 3612 


JOSEPH MUSTO 
SONS-KEENAN 
COMPANY 


MARBLE 


and 
ONYX 


535 NORTH POINT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 
1801 5. SOTO STREET 
LOS ANGELES 


70 


PATENTED ARCHITEC- 
TURE AND BUILDINGS 


RETAINING WALLS 

John B. Goldsborough of Cro- 
ton-On-Hudson, New York, has 
an invention that relates to the 
construction of walls for retaining 
the earth at the sides of excava- 
tions while being made and for 
thereafter serving as a form for, 
or in combination with, suitable 
material such as concrete, as perm- 
anent walls at the sides of the ex- 
cavations. 

А method of lining excavations 
which is in present use, consists 
of bracing the sides of the ex- 
cavation with vertical planks 
spread apart by screw jacks or 
wedged struts interposed between 
horizontal walls engaging the sur- 
faces of the planks. This construc- 
tion is only temporary at best and 
requires a great number of pieces 
of large and expensive lumber in 
order to obtain sufficient bracing. 
Furthermore, such an arrangement 
presents structural difficulties if an 
attempt is made to utilize it as a 
form for a permanent concrete 
wall, since the mass of lumber will 
not permit of a strong wall of reg- 
ular cross-section such as may be 
necessary in wet earth or quick- 
sand, for example. 

It is the principal object of this 
invention to provide a wall which 
may, in the first instance, serve as 
a temporary structure to retain 
and brace the earth at the sides 
of an excavation while it is being 
made, and which can thereafter 
serve as a form for or be incor- 
porated in a permanent structure, 
which it reinforces. 

А further object of this inven- 
tion is to provide a method of re- 
taining wall construction in which 
uniform pieces formed of any suit- 
able construction material may be 
used for any conditions of con- 
struction. 


PLASTERING MACHINE 
Hugh A. Conley of Lynwood, 
California, has invented a plaster- 
ing machine for interior walls 
which will obviate the work of the 


GUILF OY 
Cornice Works 


General Sheet Metal 
Work 
Skylights 
Fire Doors 


GUILFOY CORNICE WORKS 
1234 Howard Street 
San Francisco 
Phone: MArket 0561 


John Rex 


@ Invites your inspec- 


tion of a choice col- 
lection of hand- 
made 17th and 18th 
century furniture. 


508 SUTTER STREET 


San Francisco 


Del Monte 
WHITE SAND 
Fan Shell — Beach 


WASHED IN FRESH WATER 
DRIED BY STEAM 
CLEAN BONE DRY 


GAS 


Del Monte Properties Company 
Phone GArfield 4533 


401 Crocker Bnilding San Francisco 


Specify 


DICKEY 


CLAY 
PRODUCTS 


Dickey Mastertile Face Brick 

Partition Tile Fire Brick 

Drain Tile Paving Brick 
Fireproofing Tile Wall Coping 

Floor Tile Fine Lining 

Common Brick Dickey Flashing Blocks 


W. S. DICKEY CLAY MFG. 


COMPANY 
SAN FRANCISCO 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


McClintic-Marshall 
Corporation 


Subsidiary of бая Steel 
Corporation 


Bethlehem Eu 
STEEL BRIDGES 
and BUILDINGS 


215 WEST SIXTH STREET 
LOS ANGELES 


2050 BRYANT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


S M I TH 
Lumber Company 


OF OAKLAND 


Lumber and Mill Work 


19TH AVE. AND ESTUARY 
Oakland, California 
FRuitvale 3174 


ARMCO 


Special Analysis 
Iron and Steel 
Sheets and Plates 
For Building Construction 
e 


THE AMERICAN ROLLING MILL CO. 
540 Tenth Street, San Francisco 
Phone: MArket 3495 
32 W. Connecticut Street, Seattle 


v 


Specify Armco Sheets and 
Plates for all purposes 
where durable, finely- 
finished construction is 
required. 


TRANSIT-MIX 
CONCRETE 


A Perfect-Blend 
Material 


Golden Gate Atlas 


Materials Co. 


Sixteenth and Harrison Streets 
San Francisco 
Phone HEmlock 7020 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


hod-carrier and relieve the plas- 
terer of the labor of transferring 
the plaster to the surface to be 
plastered. 

The machine mixes the plaster 
continuously and applies it im- 
mediately after it is mixed so that 
the long delay between the mix- 
ing and the application of the 
plaster in the present method is 
substantially eliminated. By the 
use of the machine a plaster hav- 
ing Portland cement as one of the 
ingredients can be used, which 
plaster produces a superior and 
harder surface but which cannot 
ordinarily be used on account of 
the speed with which it sets. 


BuILDING AND BuirpiNcG SECTION 

Ernst Geiger of Irvington, New 
Jersey, has invented an individual 
and assembled building unit for 
wall construction of the factory- 
fabricated slab type. The units 
when built up are very firmly and 
securely in place and highly re- 
sistant to breakage or disclocation 
even under sudden shocks and 
stresses incidental to their handl- 
ing and transportation. 

Means are provided to permit 
ready and convenient attachment 
of ornamental mouldings to the in- 
terior of the building. The joints 
of the units are concealed and the 
units when set up produce a dec- 
orative interior effect. The joints 
between the units are effectively 
packed with material which not 
only renders them wind-proof but 
prevents the passage of moisture 
from one section to another and 
the entrance of rain or seepage 
into the hollow interior of the slab. 


ASPHALT SHINGLES 

Ап invention by Joseph О. Jones 
of Kingsville, Texas, consists of a 
composition ог asphalt roofing 
shingle having strands of wire at 
its free ends to effectively lock the 
free ends against displacement by 
the action of the wind and also to 
lock one row or series to another 
row ог Series. 

The inventor claims that the 
lower edges of the starting shingles 


ROCKWOOD 
SPRINKLER CO. 


AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER 
SYSTEMS 
FOR INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL, 
MERCANTILE HLDGS, AND 
INSTITUTIONS 


SIMPLIFIED SPRINKLER 


SYSTEMS 
FOR 
HOMES, SMALL STORES AND 
GARAGES 


7 FRONT ST. SAN FRANCISCO, CAL. 


REPUBLIC STEEL 


CORPORATION 


=R 


Manufacturers о] 
ENDURO Stainless Steel; TON- 
CAN Copper Molybdenum Ноп 
Sheets and Pipe; and Steel Pipe, 
Sheets and Reinforcing Bar for 

every building purpose. 
Write for information 
Rialto Building, San Francisco, Calif. 


Firat Natl. Bank Bldg., Los Angelea 
Smith Tower Building, Seattle, Wash. 


MERCURY PRESS 


We Print 
The ARCHITECT and 
ENGINEER 


“A Thing of Beauty 
Is a Joy Forever” 


942 HOWARD STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


Grinnell Automatic 


SPRINKLER 


GRINNELL COMPANY 
OF THE PACIFIC 


ENGINEERS AND 
CONTRACTORS 


VALVES, PIPE and FITTINGS 


601 BRANNAN STREET 
San Francisco 


71 


Phone DOuz!as 1120-1121 


Larsen and Larsen 


General Contractors 


” 


629 BRYANT STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO 


FORDERER 
CORNICE WORKS 


Copper Roofs 
Galvanized Iron Work 
Elevator Doors 


259 Potrero Avenue, San Francisco 
Phone HEmlock 4100 


Robert W. Hunt Company 
ENGINEERS 
Inspection - Tests - Consultation 


Inspection and Tests of Structural 
Steel, Reinforcing Steel 
and Cement. 

Field Inspection and Supervision 
of Consruction of Steel and 
Concrete Structures. 
Cement, Concrete, Chemical, Met- 
allurgical, X-Ray and Physical 
Laboratories. 


Chicago - New York - Pittsburgh 


All Large Cities 
San Francisco, 251 Kearny Street 


Chicago 


HOSPITAL 


SILENT CALL 
SIGNAL SYSTEMS 


—— 


GARNETT YOUNG AND CO. 
Pacific Coast Seles Engineers 
390 FOURTH ST. SAN FRANCISCO 


Seattle Los Angeles Portland 


72 


are securely held in a flat position 
on the roof and will resist the 
efforts of the wind to raise them, 
with the result that a perfect 
water-tight roof is provided. 


GRATING STRUCTURE FOR 
WiNDows 
Ап invention by Wallace М. 
Robinson of Minneapolis, relates 
to a protective grating for win- 
dows. Attached to the lower rail 
of the window sash are a plural- 
ity of vertical bars which move 
with the window sash and slide in 
and out of the wall beneath the 
sill. Thus when the window sash 
is moved up the protective bars 
will move up and prevent anyone 
from entering the room by the way 
of the space between the bottom 
of the sash and the top of the sill. 
When the sash is down the bars 
are hidden out of sight. 


PROTECTIVE COATING FOR STEEL 

Emile Jansen of San Francisco, 
Assignor to General Paint Corp- 
oration, San Francisco, has т- 
vented a protective coating for 
structural steel beams and irreg- 
ular structural shapes, such as H- 
Beams and [-Веатз, and the like, 

Where steel structural members 
are exposed to severe atmospheric 
conditions or to the action of salt 
water, fog or spray, they are sub- 
ject to rapid corrosion unless given 
a heavy coating of apshaltic or 
bituminous enamel paint or 
other protective composition. If 
these shapes, and particularly ir- 
regular ones, such as H-beams or 
I-beams are coated before being 
set in place, great difficulty is ex- 
perienced in protecting the coated 
edges or flanges, as handling of 
the beams often causes the coating 
material to be scraped off the 
edges and corners. 

In order better to protect the 
coating on these various surfaces 
and to prevent the coating from 
chipping off and at the same time 
to make the coating more resistant 
to abrasion in handling, it is pro- 
posed to apply fabric, such as 
canvas or burlap, over the edges 
or surfaces to be protected. This 


REG. U. S. PAT. OFF. 


*More than a 
building paper" 


v 


THE SISALKRAFT CO. 
205 West Wacker Drive 
(Canal Station) Chicago, ІП, 


55 New Montgomery Street 
San Francisco, Calif. 


CRANE 


High Class Plumbing 
Fixtures 


Yw 


ni In 


Ата, PRINCIPAL Coast CITIES 


THE TORMEY 
COMPANY 


GENERAL PAINTERS 
AND DECORATORS 


Phone UNderhill 1913 


563 FULTON STREET 
San Francisco 


W. H. PICARD, Inc. 


PLUMBING, HEATING, 
VENTILATING and 
POWER PLANTS 


5656 College Avenue 
5662 Keith Avenue 
Oakland California 
Phones РІ edmont 9004-9005 


The Architect and Engincer, March, 1933 


OcEAN SHORE 


IRON WORKS 


550-558 EIGHTH STREET 
MA rket 0462-0463 


California 


San Francisco 


Ў 
STEAM BOILERS 
STEEL TANKS 
SMOKE STACKS 
e WATER e 
е HEATERS • 


LUXOR 


WINDOW SHADES 


Translucent Shading 
of highest count 
cambric 


William Volker & Co. 
631 Howard Street 
San Francisco 


CLERVI 
MARBLE CO. 


MANUFACTURING CONTRACTORS 


Foreign and Domestic 
Marbles 


Interior & Exterior Buildings 


Office & Mill, 1721 San Bruno Ave. 


Phone MI ssion 6625 
SAN FRANCISCU, CAL. 


The Architect and Enginecr, March, 1933 


fabric is applied over the coating, 
usually bituminous material, and 
is mopped on with an additional 
application of either hot or cold 
material. The fabric thereby being 
thoroughly bonded to the original 
coating provides a substantial re- 
inforcement to the latter. 


SMALL HOUSE DESIGNS 

The Achitectural Guild of Small 
Homes Design has been formed 
by a group of Chicago architects 
to provide architectural service to 
owners of small homes at low cost. 
It has a plan of operation which 
the architects believe is practical. 
The architects pool their services. 
Their drawings are available to 
any member of the Guild to use 
in serving clients who are unable 
to acquire the individual services 
of an architect. The full commis- 
sion was paid each architect who 
submitted a plan and which was 
accepted for use in their library 
Before approval these drawings 
passed a jury of prominent archi- 
tects. 

The next step was to create in- 
terest for these services. Towards 
this end a small book was furnish- 
ed to anyone interested in build- 
ing. This booklet contains various 
architectual designs with reading 
matter outlining the important fac- 
tors which should be given con- 
sideration when building. The 
value of an architect's services is 
strongly emphasized. 

A set of these plans is available 
to any member of the Guild with 
a charge of $5. The architect then 
charges his client a specified cost 
for plans, plus a small fee for sup- 
ervision. Only registered archi- 
tects are to be given approval in 
joining this Guild. In order to 
further create interest in this un- 
dertaking these books are furnish- 
ed to lumber dealers, realtors, 
manufacturers, contractors and 
others interested in the construc- 
tion field with the charge of a 
nominal sum in order that they 
may distribute them to builders 
who are unable to require the in- 
dividual services of an architect.— 
Exchange. 


John Grace 
P. Е, Reilly 


Building 


Contractors 


and Managers of 


Construction 


CLAUS SPRECKELS 
BUILDING 


San Francisco 


Telephone GArfield 7742 


Phone GArfield 1164 


Hunter & Hudson 


Consulting Engineers 
DESIGNERS OF HEATING 
AIR CONDITIONING 
VENTILATING AND WIRING 
SYSTEMS, MECHANICAL 
AND ELECTRICAL EQUIP- 
MENT OF BUILDINGS 
41 SUTTER STREET 


ROOM 710 " " 
San Francisco California 


DINWIDDIE 
CONSTRUCTION 
COMPANY 


Builders of the new gymna- 
sium, University of Cali- 


fornia; Grace Cathedral, 
Russ Building and Hartford 
Insurance Building, San 
Francisco; Life Science 
Building, University of Cali- 
fornia, Berkeley. 


CROCKER BUILDING 
SAN FRANCISCO 


73 


McNEAR BRICK 


FOR 
Beauty and 
Permanence 

EWS 
McNear Brick Company 


Main Office and Factories 


McNEAR POINT 
San Rafael, Calif. 


San Francisca Office and Yard 


417 BERRY STREET 


Architectural 
Metals 
Mouldings --- Grilles 


Tubing --- Ornaments 
of 2... 
Steel --- Bronze 


Aluminum 


BRAUN-STEEPLE CO.,LTD. 
636 Potrero Avenue 
San Francisco 


1203 E. 8th Street 
Los Angeles 


APEX 
Blo-Air Fan Heaters 


Portable and Wall Types 
1320 watts to 4000 watts 


Thermostat Control if Desired 


Some- 
thing 
New 
and 
Better. 


Tests 
show 50% 
greater 
temperature 
rise in 
living 
zone. 


Blo-Air Heaters use a fan to circu- 
late the air instead of depending npon 
the slow process of gravity circulation. 
Instant heat and a greater amount in 
the lower living zone of the room, with 
the same consumption, Fan can be 
used without the heat for cooling. 
Switches easily accessible at top. Can 
be installed under windows. 

There is a complete line of Apex Alr 
and Water Heaters. 


APEX Manufacturing Company 
Oakland, California 


Distributors 
SANDOVAL SALES CQ. 
557 Market St., San Francisco 


APEX SALES СО. 
1855 Industrial St., Los Angeles 


74 


FURNITURE CONTEST 

For the benefit of good design, 
and in order to develop in the 
minds of the American public, as 
well as furniture dealers, manu- 
facturers and decorators, a real 
appreciation of good design in 
modern furniture, the American 
Walnut Manufacturers Associa- 
tion is sponsoring a design contest 
for which prizes are offered as fol- 
lows: 0 
Bedroom Suite—First Prize............ $500.00 
Dining Room Suite—First Prize... 400.00 
Bedroom Suite—Second Prize ...... 200.00 

The designer is not required to 
discard all of the elements known 
in classical or period furniture. 
The purpose is to develop com- 
mercial suites of distinctive mod- 
ern furniture to be executed in 
various types of America's finest 
cabinetwood harmoniously com- 
bined. 


Sketches only are required in 
order to enter the contest, which 
will be decided by an outstanding 
group of judges. The committee 
will consist of at least three of the 
leading retail furniture dealers in 
the United States, an authority 
from the Metropolitan Museum of 
New York or the Chicago Art In- 
stitute, an interior decorator, pos- 
sibly a furniture manufacturer, and 
one or two others. 


Following the selection of the 
winning designs and those sketch- 
es receiving honorable mention, all 
sketches will be displayed, with 
the name of the designers, at the 
leading furniture markets of this 
country, as well as at the Century 
of Progress in Chicago. 

The sketches must include a 
bedroom апа dining room suites 
and are to be submitted on the 
Imperial size sheet, 30" wide and 
22" deep. They may be either to 
scale or in perspective, all princi- 
pal dimensions being specified. 
The rules say: 

"Do not put your name on the 
design, but identify it with an 
accompanying letter. After the 
judges have made their decision 
your name plate will be added to 
the design and will accompany it 
in the various exhibits. 


MULLEN MFG. 
COMPANY 


BANK, STORE AND OFFICE 

FIXTURES—CABINET WORK 

OF GUARANTEED QUALITY 
CHURCH SEATING 


Office and Factory: 
64 RAUSCH ST., Bet. 7th and 8th Sta. 
San Francisco 
Telephone HE mlock 2858 


G. P. W. Jensen & Son 


Building Construction 


320 Market Street, San Francisco 
Phone 2444 


MacDonald & Kahn 


General 
Contractors 


OND 


Financial Center Bldg. 
405 Montgomery St. 


Зап Francisco 


WEOGE NOTCH COLUMN CLAMPS 


FOR 
Rapidity, Economy 
and Efficiency 
USE 


STEELFORMS 


FOR 
Concrete Construction 


STEELFORM 
CONTRACTING CO. 


SAN FRANCISCO LOS ANGELES 
PORTLAND SEATTLE 


DOVETAIL ANCHOR SLOT 


Л 
а 
a 
[e] 
ш 
ш 
< 
о 
n 
x 
ш 
a 
2. 
о 
z 
ш 
zi 
- 
E 
4 


STEEL,CONSTRUCTION TOWERS 


The Architect and Engineer, March, 1933 


Anderson & Ringrose 


General Contractors 


320 Market Street, San Francisco 


Phone DO uglas 1373 


ORANO OAZO 


What architects and all who build have 
м learned to expect from Quandt craftsmen: 


“Co-operation for Quality” 

6 Materials applied efficiently and expeditiously 
Ң by brush or spray application to achieve the 
) best result at the minimum cost to the owner. 


| A. Quandt & Sons 


‚ Painters and Decorators 
Since 1885 

374 GUERRERO STREET, SAN FRANCISCO 
( Telephone MArkel 1711 
У, ewe 
| Quandt-quality is available for the small job 
Қ as well as the large. Pioneers апа Special- 
(б ists in the application of Lacquer in the 
architectural field. Complete decorative 


color schemes designed and furntshed. 
Advice for technical painting requirements 
@ furnished. Our operations are state-wide, 
МА 
2 ооо LOOP LONG 


ыл] 


BATES-CARPENTER СО. 


Distributors of 
Building Specialties 


We are pleased to announce our appoint- 
ment as distributors for Northera California 
afe 
DURA STEEL PRODUCTS COMPANY 
Bath Room Cahinets 
Metal lroning Boards 

and other — . 

Metal Building Specialties 
Estimates will be furnished 
without obligation 
Display rooms at Building Material 
and Machinery Exhibit 


557 Market Street 
San Francisco SUtter 5328 


LEATHER-STEEL 
RUBBER-COCOA 
WOOD 


Mats and Mattings 
Ezy-Rug Carpet-Tex 


Manufactured and Installed by 


LEATHER 
MAT MFG. CO.. Inc. 


340 Sansome St. San Francisco 


The Architect and Епдіпсег, March, 1933 


“BEDROOM Surre: Shall consist 
of a dresser, chest, vanity and bed, 
such as may be produced by rep- 
utable manufacturers to sell at a 
wholesale price range of from 
$125.00 to $175.00. Your sketch 
should include additional pieces 
such as a night table, bench, and 
chair (these (о be produced at a 
cost in addition to the above). 

“Dininc Room Surre: Shall 
consist of table, buffet, server, 
china cabinet, and chairs {one arm 
and one side), to fall within the 
same price range. 

“The basic cabinetwood shall 
be walnut for solid parts and for 
the predominating surfaces. (You 
may feel free to use any of the 
great variety of types of walnut 
veneers. Other woods in accord- 
ance with your own desires may 
be used for decorative features. 

"Not necessarily on the sketch 
itself, but at least accompanying 
it, should be a definite description 
of the exact types of veneers you 
desire to have used. 

“The suites are to appeal to the 
medium and higher medium class 
trade. 

“The drawings or sketches of 
designs must be in the hands of 
the American Walnut Manufac- 
turers’ Association, 616 South 
Michigan Boulevard, Chicago, Ш., 
not later than March 31. 

"In the case of the winning de- 
signs, full sized details must be 
available within ten (10) days 
after the awards are made." 


L. A. FEDERAL BUILDING 

Final sketches for the new 
United States post office and 
court house in Los Angeles, pre- 
pared by John C. Austin and 
Frederick M. Ashley and John 
Parkinson & Donald B. Parkinson, 
associated architects, have been 
formally approved by the Treas- 
ury Department and the working 
drawings are now being started. 
Completion of these will require 
about six months. At the outset 
only a few men can be employed 
as the plans must first be devel- 
oped before detail drawings can 
be made. 


BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 


Recent Contracts Completed 
Y. W. С. A. Building 
San Francisco 

Library Building 
Berkeley 

Post Office Building 
Oakland 

City Hospital 
Palo Alto 

Home of the Blind 
Berkeley 


К. E. PARKER CO., INC. 
135 South Park San Francisco 
Phone KE arny 6640 


Good Buildings Deserve 
Good Hardware 


[PALACE HARDWARE 00) 


581 Market Street 
SUtter 6063 


Office 


Partitions 


Reinhold sectional wood and 
glass partitions (interchange- 
able) may be adapted to any 
modern office requirement in a 
new or old building. 


Complete Information File 
sent on request 


Pacific Manufacturing 
Company 


High Class Interior Finish 
Quality Millwork 
Monadnock Bldg., 


San Franclaco Loe Angeles 
GA rfield 7735 AX ridge 9011 


1313 Seventh Street, Oakland 
GL encoart 7850 


641 Merrill Are., 


76 


Index to Advertising Announcements 


For Classified List of Advertisers see Pages 77, 78, 79 


A 
Asset обе MIIE сес аана 71 
Жа етегі ата О К ко н 5 
Apes Mfg. Со. не 74 
B 
раев @an petite (Оф. шоок ҢЦ|(ұқ 00 75 
гли ссср Со, ШО /)|Цү)үҚ|Ц 2: 74 
Bro оиа Со. С ЫС =ЕС 67 
С 
БН: охооо 8 
California Shade Cloth Co., Inc. .................... 67 
С 7 Sema М ea ett. 8 
Clervi Marble & Mosaic Со. .................-.--------- 3 
Gimon Consin Со. Е 69 
Dare Conna ces -д 2 
(НЕМЕ eee ава Е 65 
D 
Davey Tree ее Со Ltd... eere 6 
IDeIBNIGDEeBESOGBDENDIESR -- 70 
Dickey Clay Mig. Со., W. 8. ......................... 70 
Dinwiddie Construction Co. ...............22.1.. 3 
F 
Forderer Cornice Works ................................ 72 
G 
Garnett Young & Company ..... s 72 
ийе е ааа С 0 2 - 5 
Golden Gate Atlas Materials Со. .................... 71 
ЕН д 3 
Grinnell Company of the Pacific .................... 7/3 
(ай По (lexus МУ а С 70 
Соот, бае © Company eee 67 
н 
Желе 9. па 62 
Haws Sanitary Drinking Faucet Co. ................ 65 
НИ: 12 
{бше (S? ГОША ОЙ 0 2 73 
J 
jenen © 10, М. сеа ----........- 74 
lese (Обь, Sh Ше 70 
Јесен Sarmi Co, а 2- 5 
сет ейте (Оо а 2... 68 
К 
Гаа П. О 2 66 
kowance Boiler Orp Re E ae 70 
Kawneer МЕТ 69 
L 
arsen С eare T ш 22. 70) 
Teather Mat У. (© - 75 
[bind enemy с лош Ооп, Иле оок 64 


M 
Mac Donaldie ЕК ашы ee 74 
IMacGruer © oe ы 68 
МСМ ата НЕНА ү 
MeNear Brick Gode ee 74 
Mercury Press ШИЕ с ы 71 
Mueller Go, „ш RM 68 
Mullen Manufacturing Со. ..... sess 74 
Musto Sons Keenan Co., Joseph .................... 70 
N 
National Lead Company -eere ee е 
о 
Ocean Shore Пом 75 
(0019 Тозо Company. EE © 
Р 
Pacific Coast Electrical Bureau mm 63 
Pacific Coast Gas Association ......................... ТІ 
Pacifc Coast Steek Corp = ar à 
Pacific Foundry Co. .............-... M ont 66 
Pacific Manufacturing Co. ....... 5 
Pacine Metals (ӨО etd ЕЕ СТЕ кен 66 
Pacific Portland Cement Со 80 
Palace Hardware Со EE 75 
Вага пе Companies Е ee 1 
Parker Co їс, К. ME WS 
Picard, Тлс., We ie — е 7) 
Portland Cement Association ................ Back Cover 
Q 
Quandt e2 Sons, A eee 7/5 
R 
Republic тее (бото EE 71 
Rex, Тов 70 
Rockwood prnklem Co тн 71 
S 
Sandoval: Sales Фо 74 
лата ore WD 
Sloane; М 68 
Smith Lumber Co. of Oakland ...................... 71 
Stanley Works) The -r шш 64 
Steeltonm) Contracting, Фо Mee 7+ 
т 
Tormey Company е е а 72 
У 
Vaughn G. E. Witt Oo. eee НЕУИНЕ 67 
Volker б ‘Cot Улт е 73 
Ww 
Western о ОТЕ и 70 
Wood Lumber (Со, 18, TKE 69 


*Appears alternate months 


The Architect and Engincer, March, 1933 


She 


E 


