5/S 


DOCUMENTS  DEPT. 

SAN  FRANCISCO 
PUBLIC  LIBRARY 

REFERENCE 

BOOK 


Not  U>  be  taken  from  the  Library 


Historic  Structure  Report 


WAR  MEMORIAL  OPERA  HOUSE 


San  Francisco,  California 


Prepared  for 

CITY  & COUNTY  OF  SAN  FRANCISCO 

DEPARTMENT  OF  PUBLIC  WORKS 
BUREAU  OF  ARCHITECTURE 

July  9,  1993 

documents  dept, 

APR  0 8 1995 

SAN  FRANCISCO 
PUBLIC  LIBRARY 

CAREY  & CO. 

ARCHITECTURE 


documents  department 

1* 


SAN  FRANCISCO 
PUBLIC  LIBRARY 


REFERENCE 

BOOK 


Not  to  be  taken  from  the  Library 


July  9,  1993 


3 1223  04181  1127 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION  1 

BACKGROUND 

History  3 

Chronology  of  Construction  6 

Evaluation  Methodology 18 

EXTERIOR  EVALUATION 

Architectural  Description  19 

Elevations 22 

Existing  Condition 27 

INTERIOR  EVALUATION 

Architectural  Description  31 

Floor-by-Floor  Analysis 57 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

General  Recommendations  97 

Exterior  Recommendations  98 

Interior  Recommendations  103 

Structural  Recommendations Ill 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


113 


D REF  720.9794  H6298 


Historic  structure 
report  : War  Memorial 
1993  . 


3 1223  04181  1127 


£ F PUBLIC  LIBRARY 


INTRODUCTION 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2015 


https://archive.org/details/historicstructur3199care 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


INTRODUCTION 

The  purpose  of  this  Historic  Structure  Report  is  to 
provide  the  Bureau  of  Architecture  with  a report  on 
the  existing  condition  of  the  San  Francisco  Opera 
House.  It  is  based  on  a comprehensive  general 
building  inspection  and  evaluation,  review  of  ap- 
plicable existing  documentation,  and  additional 
historical  research.  This  report  provides  information 
and  recommendations  to  guide  future  decisions  about 
building  repairs,  rehabilitation,  restoration,  and 
alterations. 

Carey  &.  Co,  Inc.  prepared  this  Historic  Structure 
Report  on  the  San  Francisco  Opera  House  for  the 
City  of  San  Francisco  as  part  of  the  Earthquake 
Safety  Program  (Phase  II).  The  San  Francisco 
Bureau  of  Architecture,  architect  for  the  project, 
assisted  Carey  &.  Co.  with  this  survey  and  evaluation. 

The  Earthquake  Safety  Program  provides  funding  for 
the  evaluation  and  rehabilitation  of  specific  City- 
owned  buildings.  EQE/Structus  an  association  of 
EQE  International  Engineering  and  Design  and 
Structus  are  presently  preparing  a Phase  I study  for 
seismic  strengthening  of  the  War  Memorial  Opera 
House. 

The  San  Francisco  Opera  House  is  within  and  con- 
tributes to  the  National  Register  of  Historic  Places 
San  Francisco  Civic  Center  Historic  District.  There- 
fore, any  work  on  the  Opera  House  should  comply 
with  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior’s  Standards  for 
Rehabilitation  of  Historic  Structures.  This 


report  provides  the  guidance  necessary  to  meet 

these  standards.  It  includes  the  following: 

■ A description  of  the  Historic  Resource. 

■ A survey  of  the  existing  condition  of  the  building 
exterior. 

■ A survey  of  the  interior  room  by  room,  noting 
the  existing  condition  of  features  and  spaces. 

■ A determination  of  the  significance  of  architec- 
tural features,  finishes,  and  spaces. 

■ Recommendations  for  rehabilitating  historically 
significant  features  and  spaces. 

■ An  evaluation  of  recommendations  for  integra- 
ting existing  historically  significant  features  with 
proposed  structural,  mechanical,  electrical,  and 
disabled- access  improvements. 

■ A recommendation  of  guidelines  to  ensure  com- 
pliance with  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior’s  Stan- 
dards for  Rehabilitation  of  Historic  Structures  in 
future  building  projects. 

Carey  &.  Co.  staff  who  conducted  the  survey  and 

assessment  are: 


Alice  Ross  Carey,  AIA 
Robert  Vail  Cole,  AIA 
Gordon  Oliver  White 
Christina  Lee  Wallace 
Craig  Michael  Hausman 
Kyle  David  James 
Lucy  Cornell 
Marianne  Hurley 
Anne  Bloomfield 


Principal 
Project  Manager 
Project  Captain 
Conservator 
Job  Captain 
Assistant 
Assistant 
Intern 
Historian 


? 

cr 


INTRODUCTION 


Recommendations  Appendix 


DacKgrounu  nxienor  E-vaiuanon  mienur  cva.uauon  Recommendations 


BACKGROUND 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


HISTORY 

San  Francisco  has  had  a reputation  as  an  enthu- 
siastic opera  town  ever  since  the  Gold  Rush.  In  fact 
the  first  complete  grand  opera  performance  “La 
Sonambula”  was  performed  in  1851  at  the  Adelphi 
Theater  on  Clay  Street.  Two  of  the  city’s  favorite 
theaters  in  the  late  1800’s  were  Wade’s  Opera 
House  (which  became  the  Grand  Opera  House)  on 
Mission  Street  and  the  Tivoli  Opera  House  on  Eddy 
Street  (see  figure  1). 

Traveling  opera  compa- 
nies from  all  over  the 
world  performed  in  a 
variety  of  San  Francisco 
theaters,  most  of  which 
burned  after  the  1906 
Earthquake.  After  the 
1906  Earthquake  both 
the  San  Francisco  Sym- 
phony (formed  1911)  and 
the  San  Francisco  Opera 
(formed  1923)  used 
various  theaters  including 
the  acoustically  poor 
Civic  Auditorium,  "a 
wholly  inadequate 
acoustically  erratic  bam 
of  a building"  (Chronicle, 

10/15/32). 

The  San  Francisco  Civic 
Center’s  character  and  overall  style  are  derived  from 
a design  devised  by  B.J.S.  Cahill  before  the  1906 
earthquake  and  adopted  by  the  City  in  1912  (see 
figure  2).  Beginning  in  1911  there  were  numerous 
proposals  for  a performing  arts  complex  associated 
with  the  proposed  Civic  Center.  By  1913,  as  the 
plan  evolved,  City  Hall  was  repositioned  to  the 
present  Van  Ness  Avenue  site  and  the  Opera 
House  was  proposed  to  be  built  on  the  east  side  of 
the  central  plaza  next  to  the  Library  on  the  Mar- 


shall Square  site  (site  for  the  new  Main  Library 
currently  under  construction)  (see  figure  3).  This 
location  was  not  realized  and  the  present  Opera 
House  was  incorporated  into  the  later  War  Memo- 
rial Complex  plan. 

The  San  Francisco  Civic  Center  is  regarded  by 
many  scholars  as  the  finest  and  most  complete 
manifestation  of  the  City 
Beautiful  movement  in 
the  United  States.  This 
movement  was  an  aspect 
of  the  general  drive  for 
municipal  reform  in  the 
1890’s  intended  to  bring 
order  and  beauty  to 
American  cities.  Each 
building  was  intended  to 
contribute  to  the  whole 
civic  complex,  comple- 
menting and  enhancing 
the  focal  point  and  main 
structure-City  Hall. 
Beauty  and  order  on  this 
monumental  scale  exem- 
plified the  ideals  of  city 
planning  and  noble 
municipal  reform  popular 
at  the  turn  of  the  centu- 
ry. Consequently,  the 
classical  vocabulary,  beaux-arts  scale,  siting  (grand 
and  axial),  and  formal  landscaping  were  employed 
to  create  a harmonious  ensemble  of  civic  pride  and 
power. 

In  1918,  plans  were  initiated  to  erect  a building 
for  a symphony  hall  and  an  art  museum.  In  1920 
the  art  association  bought  the  block  where  Davies 
Hall  now  stands.  It  was  at  this  time  that  the 
American  Legion  became  involved  and  proposed  to 


Figure  1 - Tivoli  Opera  Mouse  ca.  1890. 
Courtesy  of  Performing  Arts  Library  and  Museum 


BACKGROUND 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


dedicate  the  performing  arts  complex  to  the  Great 
War  (WWI)  as  San  Francisco’s  "living  memorial." 


1932  with  the  production  of  “Tosca”  (see  figure 

22). 


In  1922  it  was  decided  more  land  was  necessary  for 
a larger  facility.  An  architectural  advisory  commit- 
tee was  named  for  the  War  Memorial  project  which 
included  Bernard  Maybeck,  Arthur  Brown,  Jr.,  John 
Galen  Howard,  G.  Albert  Lansburgh,  Frederick 
Meyer,  Willis  Polk,  and  John  Reid,  Jr.  Ultimately, 
Arthur  Brown  Jr.,  and  G.  Albert  Lansburgh  became 
the  designing  architects  for  the  Opera  House.  From 
1923-1925  the  present  site  was  acquired  by  the 

City tWO  blocks  bound-  Thc  Architect 

ed  by  Van  Ness  Avenue, 

McAllister,  Grove,  and 
Franklin  Streets . 

Located  west  of  City 
Hall,  these  two  blocks 
expanded  beyond  the 
original  Civic  Center 
boundaries,  but  was 
proposed  to  harmonize 
with  the  original  plan. 

The  War  Memorial  Site 
had  been  primarily 
residential  before  the 
1906  Earthquake. 


The  1913  Sanborn 
Insurance  Co.  map  shows 

a mixture  of  flats,  boarding  houses,  hotels,  auto 
companies,  some  commercial  buildings,  a livery,  and 
some  vacant  lots  (see  figure  4) . There  arose  a senti- 
ment that  the  back  of  City  Hall  should  have  a more 
compatible  set  of  neighbors  especially  when  more 
commercial  and  industrial  uses  appeared  certain. 

In  1927,  a $4,000,000  bond  election  provided  the 
necessary  funds  to  begin  the  project.  The  total  cost 
of  the  two  buildings,  one  a music  auditorium,  the 
other  a veterans  and  arts  building  was  $6,125,000. 
The  Opera  House  opened  officially  on  October  15, 


Figure  2 - Proposed  Civic  Center,  01/01/12 


The  War  Memorial  Complex  as  completed  in  1932 
consists  of  the  nearly  identical  pair  of  monumental 
classical  structures — the  Opera  House  and  Veter- 
ans Building  (see  figure  8).  Although  there  were 
sound  aesthetic  reasons  for  designing  the  two 
buildings  as  a matched  pair,  in  the  end  they  were 
made  identical  because  neither  the  opera 
supporters  nor  the  veterans  would  consent  to  the 
other  having  a more  complete,  costly,  or 
and  Engineer  magnificent  building. 

The  Opera  House,  the 
more  complicated 
structure,  was  designed 
first  and  the  Veterans 
Building  derived  its 
shape  and  design  from  it. 
On  the  Fulton  Street  site 
from  Van  Ness  Avenue 
to  Franklin  Street, 
between  the  two 
buildings,  a formal 
garden  (designed  by 
Thomas  Church)  was 
completed  in  1936.  This 
is  the  Memorial  Court 
and  provides  a gracious 
space  that  connects 
conceptually  to  the  front  of  City  Hall. 

From  1932  to  1980  the  Opera  House  was  home  to 
the  San  Francisco  Opera,  Symphony,  and  Ballet 
Companies.  Each  shared  the  facilities  and  rotated 
their  seasons  during  the  year.  After  World  War  II, 
the  Opera  House  was  the  location  for  important 
ceremonial  sessions  and  speeches  during  the  cre- 
ation of  the  United  Nations  (April  25-June  26, 
1945).  President  Harry  Truman  addressed  the 
closing  organizational  session  in  the  Opera  House 
auditorium.  This  culminated  seven  weeks  of 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9.  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


working  conferences  at  the  War  Memorial.  Heads 
of  state,  282  delegates  from  49  countries,  and  5,000 
other  people  attended  this  historic  conference. 


studio,  office,  and  classroom  space.  With  this 
recent  expansion,  the  Performing  Arts  Complex 
functions  as  a unified  and  co-operative  venture  for 
the  three  resident  companies. 


On  September  8,  1951,  the  Opera  House  was  again 
used  as  the  location  for  the  signing  of  an  important 
treaty.  The  occasion  was  the  return  of  sovereignty 
to  Japan  after  the  United  State’s  occupation  after 
WWII.  The  treaty  was  drawn  in  the  Veterans 
Building  and  signed  in  the  Opera  House. 


San  Francisco  in  the  1960’s  and  1970’s  began  to 
propose  needed  expansion  of  the  Performing  Arts 
Complex.  The  Opera  The  Architect 


The  principal  architect  for  the  Opera  House  and 
Veterans  Building  was  Arthur  Brown,  Jr.  He  was 
assisted  by  G.  Albert  G.  Albert  Lansburgh.  Brown, 
a former  student  of  Bernard  Maybeck  and  his  part- 
ner, John  Bakewell,  Jr.,  were  the  architects  for  the 
San  Francisco  City  Hall,  and  the  Civic  Center 
Federal  Building.  Brown  also  designed  Coit  Tower, 
Temple  Emanu-El,  the  P.G.&E.  Building,  and  the 
<>d  Engineer  Department  of  Labor  and 


House  was  crowded  and 
had  been  used  for  San 
Francisco’s  resident 
companies  since  1932. 
First,  an  addition  was 
built  onto  the  rear  of  the 
Opera  House  in  1976 
providing  additional 
space  for  stage  scenery 
and  offices  (see  figures  9 
and  11).  Next,  Davies 
Symphony  Hall  was 
completed  in  1980  on 
the  block  across  from  the 


3 - Proposed  Opera  House,  07/01/13 


Interstate  Commerce 
Commission  Buildings  in 
Washington,  D.C.  He 
served  on  the  architec- 
tural boards  of  the 
Panama-Pacific  Interna- 
tional Exposition  and 
1933  Chicago  World’s 
Fair,  and  chaired  the 
Golden  Gate  Exposition 
held  on  Treasure  Island 
in  San  Francisco  in 
1939-1940. 


Opera  House  at  Van  Ness  Avenue  and  Grove 
Street.  Added  to  the  rear  of  this  building  was 
Zellerbach  Rehearsal  Hall  completed  in  1981  and 
to  be  used  by  the  Opera,  Ballet,  and  Symphony. 
These  projects  were  all  designed  by  Skidmore, 
Owings,  and  Merrill.  In  1983,  the  Ballet  Associa- 
tion Building  on  the  west  side  of  Franklin  Street  at 
Fulton  Street  was  completed.  It  was  designed  by 
Beverly  Willis  and  provides  65,500  square  feet  of 


G.  Albert  Lansburgh,  who  also  served  in  the 
Panama-Pacific  International  Exposition  Board,  was 
principally  known  as  a theater  designer  for  the 
Orpheum  Theater  company.  He  built  vaudeville 
and  movie  houses  for  the  company  throughout  the 
U.S.  He  designed  both  the  Fox  Warfield  and  the 
Golden  Gate  Theaters  in  San  Francisco.  He  was 
primarily  responsible  for  the  interior  design  of  the 
Opera  House. 


BACKGROUND 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


CHRONOLOGY  OF  CONSTRUCTION 

The  following  is  a selective  account  of  construction,  repairs,  and  alterations  to  the  San  Francisco  War 
Memorial  Opera  House  and  Veterans  Building  based  on  "Municipal  Reports,"  City  budgets,  Building  Permit 
Applications,  newspaper  accounts,  War  Memorial  construction  archives,  and  the  like.  For  a full  list  of  the 
sources,  see  Bibliography  section.  Where  available,  a corresponding  location  of  work  has  been  included. 
Some  described  work  may  have  not  been  implemented. 


Date 

Description 

Location 

1849,  June  22 

First  documented  concert  in  San  Francisco:  songs  and 
piano. 

Portsmouth  Square 

1851,  Feb.  12 

First  grand  opera  performance  in  San  Francisco:  "La 
Sonambula." 

Adelphi  Theater  Clay 
Street 

1856,  Nov.  29 

Maguire’s  Opera  House  opens. 

Washington  Street  near 
Montgomery 

1866 

First  art  museum  opens,  in  Woodward’s  Garden. 

Block  bounded  by  Mis- 
sion, Valencia,  13  th  and 
14th  Streets 

1871 

San  Francisco  Art  Association  established,  ancestor  of  San 
Francisco  Museum  of  Modem  Art  and  of  Art  Institute. 

Vicinity  480  Pine  Street 

1876,  January 

Wade’s  Opera  House  opens.  Later  known  as  Grand 
Opera  House. 

Mission  Street  near  Third 

c.  1884 

Tivoli  Opera  House  opens. 

70  Eddy  Street 

1886 

Future  War  Memorial  land  has  been  developed  for 
residential  use. 

Blocks  bounded  by  Van 
Ness,  McAllister,  Frank- 
lin, and  Grove  Streets 

1893 

San  Francisco  Art  Association  is  given  the  Mark  Hopkins 
Mansion. 

Southeast  comer  of  Cali- 
fornia and  Mason 

1899 

Use  of  future  War  Memorial  land  has  become  more  dense, 
and  stores  are  at  ground  floor  along  Van  Ness  Avenue. 

Both  blocks 

1906, 

April  18-21 

Wade’s,  Tivoli,  and  Mark  Hopkins  Mansion  all  burn 
down.  Site  of  future  War  Memorial  also  bums. 

Roughly:  waterfront  to 

Van  Ness  and  Townsend, 
plus  to  20th  and  Dolores 

c.  1907 

San  Francisco  Art  Association  reopens  the  California 
School  of  Fine  Arts  in  the  foundations  of  the  Mark 
Hopkins  Mansion. 

California  and  Mason 
Streets 

1911,  Dec.  29 

First  concert  by  San  Francisco  Symphony  Orchestra. 

Unknown 

1911-1913 

Campaign  by  Musical  Association  of  San  Francisco  for 
money  to  build  a hall  for  symphonic  performances.  Some 
money  raised,  but  not  enough  to  build. 

CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


1913 

1913 

1918 


Land  of  future  War  Memorial  has  been  redeveloped  after  Both  blocks 

the  fire  as  commercial  and  industrial;  some  land  still 

vacant. 

New  Tivoli  Opera  House  re-opened  with  performance  by  70  Eddy  Street 
the  Chicago  Opera.  Building  later  used  for  movies. 

Project  design  and  fund-raising  for  a symphony  hall  and  Davies  Hall  block 

art  museum  combined  in  one  building,  with  a memorial 

court. 


1919 


1920 

1920,  May  19 


Charles  Kendrick  brought  about  the  union  of  the  sympho-  Proposed  for  Davies  Hall 
ny-and-museum  project  with  a memorial  to  San  block 
Francisco’s  war  veterans,  approved  by  various  Posts  of 
the  American  Legion. 

San  Francisco  Art  Association  pays  $300,000  to  buy  block  Davies  Hall  block 
(playing  field)  from  St.  Ignatius  School. 


Mass  meeting  to  raise  funds  for  three-part  project:  sym-  Civic  Auditorium  and 

phony  hall,  museum,  veterans’  memorial.  Public  fund  street  comers 

drive  initiated. 


1921,  Aug.  19  Trust  Agreement  for  War  Memorial,  between  University  Proposed  for  Davies  Hall 
of  California  Regents  and  a private  board  consisting  of  block 
representatives  from  the  Symphony  Association,  the  Art 
Association,  and  the  American  Legion  Posts.  Space  for 
veterans’  organizations  to  be  allocated  by  a majority  of  the 
San  Francisco  Posts  of  the  American  Legion. 


Figure  4 - Project  Site;  Sanborn  Fire  Insurance  Map,  1913 


BACKGROUND  ■ 7 


m 


* 

re 

0 


3 

3 


Appendix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERAHOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


1922,  Oct.  11 

Architectural  Advisory  Committee  named  for  War 
Memorial  project:  Bernard  Maybeck  (chair),  Arthur 

Brown,  Jr.,  John  Galen  Howard,  G.  Albert  Lansburgh, 
Frederick  H.  Meyer,  Willis  Polk,  and  John  Reid,  Jr. 

1922 

Architectural  Advisory  Committee  recommends  more 
space  than  the  one  square  block  in  order  to  fulfill  all  the 
program  needs.  John  Drum  conceived  plan  to  use  the  two 
blocks  directly  across  from  City  Hall.  The  trustees  would 
trade  the  Davies  Hall  block  for  one  of  the  two  new  blocks, 
and  the  City  would  buy  the  other.  The  plan  was  addition- 
ally attractive  because  Lyon  Van  and  Storage  was  about  to 
put  up  a warehouse  on  McAllister  directly  opposite  City 
Hall. 

1923,  January 

Board  of  Supervisors  buys  out  Lyon  and  orders  condemna- 
tion proceedings  on  remainder  of  the  site. 

Two  blocks  bounded  by 
Van  Ness,  McAllister, 
Franklin,  and  Grove 
Streets 

1923,  Sept.  26 

First  performance  of  the  first  season  of  the  San  Francisco 
Opera  Company. 

Civic  Auditorium 

1924,  Oct.  24 

Trustees  sell  original  block  to  Board  of  Education. 

Davies  Hall  block 

1925 

Consultation  on  design  with  Pericles  Ansaldo  from  La 
Scala  Opera  in  Milan. 

Opera  House 

1926 

Art  Association  and  its  school  move  into  new  building. 

800  Chestnut  Street 

1926 

Veterans’  representatives  approve  65,000  square  feet  for 
their  own  use. 

Veterans  Building 

1926,  Nov.  11 

War  Memorial  ground-breaking  (premature). 

Both  buildings 

1927,  February 

Trustees  present  to  the  public  the  idea  of  a $4  million 
bond  issue  for  construction  of  the  War  Memorial. 

1927,  March 

City  Attorney  deletes  mention  of  museum  or  opera  house 
from  the  bond  issue  language  because  of  State  law  con- 
cerning public  gifts  to  private  parties. 

1927,  May  2 

Board  of  Supervisors  votes  not  to  appropriate  money  for 
construction  until  official  plans  receive  "formal  approval  of 
the  majority  of  duly  constituted  representatives  of  all  the 
war  veterans’  organizations  now  [1927]  existing  in  San 
Francisco.  " 

Both  buildings 

1927,  June  14 

Bond  issue  passes. 

Both  buildings 

1927-1930 

Arguments  over  plans  and  over  control.  Veterans’ 
organizations  demand  and  get  40,000  square  feet  addition- 
al space,  and  also  an  auditorium  with  adjustable  floor 
either  flat  for  dances  or  raked  for  concerts  and  lectures. 

Both  buildings 

1927,  Nov.  6 

Voters  pass  charter  amendment  creating  the  War  Memori- 
al Board  of  Trustees,  to  take  over  the  assets  and  responsi- 
bilities of  the  private  board. 

CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


1928,  August 

Site  cleared. 

Both  blocks 

1930,  January 

Complaints  from  public  about  "swamp"  and  debris  in  site. 

Both  blocks 

1930,  Mar.  3 

First  War  Memorial  Trustees  appointed  and  approved  (self 
elected  body  of  private  citizens). 

1931,  Nov.  11 

Cornerstones  laid. 

Both  buildings 

1931-1932 

Construction  (see  figures  5,  6,  and  7)  General 
Contractors  - Lindgren  & Swinerton,  Inc. 

Both  Buildings 

1932,  Sept.  29 

Dedication  of  War  Memorial  buildings  (see  figure  9). 

Both  buildings 

1932,  Oct.  15 

Formal  opening  of  Opera  House,  performance  of  "Tosca." 

Opera  House 

1932,  Nov.  11 

Veterans  Building  celebrated  with  parade  on  Armistice 
Day. 

Veterans  Building 

1933,  Feb.  22 

Veterans  Building  presented  by  the  City  to  the  veterans, 
parade  on  Washington’s  Birthday. 

Veterans  Building 

c.  1935 

Museum  opens,  with  sole  entry  on  McAllister  Street. 

Veterans  Building,  fourth 
floor 

1935 

Orchestra  pit  revised  for  performances  of  Wagner’s  "Ring." 

Opera  House 

1939 

Mrs.  James  L.  Flood  donates  "a  magnificent  collection  of 
art  objects,  tapestries,  mirrors,  furniture,  and  statuary  at  an 
appraised  value  of  over  $250,000."  These  are  placed  in 
the  Opera  House. 

Opera  House 

S 

t 


Fipire  5 - Construction;  Main  House,  1932 


BACKGROUND 


Kecommendations  Appendix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERAHOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


1939 

1939 

1940 

1940 

1940 


Installation  of  378  outlets  for  head  sets  for  the  hard  of  Opera  House 
hearing,  and  the  circuits  to  serve  them. 

178  veterans’  organizations  meet  regularly  in  the  building.  Veterans  Building 

Watchmen’s  tie  [sic.  time]  clock  system  installed.  Sand  Both  buildings 
jars  and  smoking  stands  purchased.  Repairs  to  plaster  and 
to  furniture.  Stone  masonry  in  foyers  ana  corridors 
regrouted  where  necessary. 


Light  standards  installed. 


Hardwood  floors  sanded  and  refinished. 


Memorial  Court  between 
the  two  buildings 

Veterans  Building,  fourth 
floor 


1940 

1940 


1940 


Front  sidewalk  step  eliminated  because  of  safety  hazard.  Veterans  Building 
Front  canopy  installed.  Ventilation  of  Veterans  Club  Awnings. 

Installation  of  stained  glass  window  in  memory  of  Grand  Veterans  Building,  north 
Army  of  the  Republic.  stairway 

landing  between  2nd  and 
3rd  floor 


Spotlights  revamped  for  stage. 


Veterans  Building,  Audi- 
torium 


1940 

1942 

1942 

1942 

1942 

1942 

1943 
1943 


Slipping  hazard  supposedly  eliminated  from  stairways 
between  main  floor  and  basement.  Boxes  repainted  and 
regilded.  Picture  molding  installed  on  Grand  Tier  cross- 
over passageway.  Ventilation  of  Balcony  Circle. 

Clubroom,  Ladies’  Lounge,  and  Room  110  painted  and 
refinished.  Walls  and  ceiling  of  Room  1 painted,  and 
wood-and-glass  partition  installed.  Auditorium  molding 
and  doors  regilded. 

83  veteran’s  organizations  meet  regularly  in  the  building. 
Stage  floor  sanded  and  refinished.  Debris  remaining  from 
original  construction  removed  from  grids  and  structural 
beams  backstage. 

Outlet  holes  drilled  and  drain  pipes  installed  for  better 
control  of  water  seepage. 

Lighting  changed  to  comply  with  wartime  "dim-out" 
regulations. 


Refinish  auditorium  foyer.  New  flooring  Room  1.  Refin- 
ish foyer  of  north  entrance  to  Museum.  Paint  and  refinish 
Museum  offices  on  first  floor. 

Repair  gold  curtain.  Scale  and  repaint  metal  marquee  on 
south  side.  Sand  and  refinish  basement  floor. 


Opera  House 


Veterans  Building 


Veterans  Building 
Opera  House 


Tunnel  between  the  two 
buildings 

Memorial  Court  and 
"many  parts  of  both 
buildings" 

Veterans  Building 


Opera  House 


10 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


1944 

Plaster  repairs.  Backstage  dressing  rooms 
refinished. 

painted  and 

Both  buildings 

1944 

Venetian  blinds  overhauled  and  repaired. 

Veterans  Building 

1944 

188  veterans’  organizations  meet  regularly  in 

the  building. 

Veterans  Building 

1944 

Miscellaneous  painting  and  refinishing. 

Museum  (fourth  floor) 

Figure  6 - Construction;  Stage,  1932 


BACKGROUND 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


1944 

Heating  system  of  clinic  improved.  Stage’s  braid  curtain 
repaired.  Gumps  donates  two  Gobelin  tapestries,  from 
"Jerusalem  Delivered"  set,  woven  at  the  Papal  Looms  in 
1733  and  1736. 

Opera  House 

1944 

Iron  fence  at  east  end  painted  and  regilded. 

Memorial  Court 

1945,  April  25 

Conference  to  found  the  United  Nations.  Temporary 

Both  buildings  in  their 

to  June  26 

alterations  include:  partitioning,  electrical  installations 

and  supplementary  illumination  in  Museum  galleries  for 
clerical  offices  and  broadcast  headquarters;  special  sets  on 
stages  of  Opera  House  and  Veterans  Auditorium;  tele- 
phone exchange  in  Veterans  Building  basement;  partitions 
etc.  in  remainder  of  Veterans  Building  for  meetings,  offices 
for  officials,  and  press  facilities;  Opera  House  basement 
turned  into  meal  facility,  its  mezzanine  furnished  as 
consultants’  lounge,  and  fourth  floor  offices  refurnished  for 
Conference  Steering  Committee. 

entirety 

1945,  July  and 
August 

Restoration  after  United  Nations  conference:  offices 

repainted;  decorative  plaster  repaired;  marble  bases  reset 
and  repaired;  office  furniture  refinished;  carpets,  drapes, 
and  upholstery  cleaned  or  repaired. 

Both  buildings 

1945 

Veterans’  organizations  request  an  additional  building  to 
accommodate  additional  organizations  anticipated  by 
veterans  of  World  War  II. 

Possibly  across  Franklin 
Street 

1945 

Iron  fences  on  east  and  west  ends  painted  and  regilded. 

Memorial  Court 

1945 

"Olio"  curtain  installed  on  stage.  "Rixon"  hinges  on  main 
auditorium  doors  repaired. 

Opera  House 

1945 

Alterations  to  Rooms  125,  126,  and  127.  Second  and 
third  floor  corridors  painted  and  refinished. 

Veterans  Building 

1945 

"Freon"-type  compressor  installed  in  drinking  water  cooling 
system.  Fire  hoses  replaced.  Metal  doors  repaired. 

Both  buildings 

1946 

U.N.  conference  repairs  completed:  400  chairs  repaired 
and  72  oak  benches  refinished. 

Probably  both  buildings 

1946 

First  floor  office  floors  lacquered.  Room  223  repainted. 
Signs  installed  above  all  first  floor  offices. 

Veterans  Building 

1946 

Over  200  veterans’  and  patriotic  organizations  meet 
regularly  in  the  building.  Building  is  at  capacity. 

Veterans  Building 

1946 

Some  sections  repaired  and  refinished. 

Museum,  fourth  floor 

1946 

Copper  coping  over  stage  and  roof  repaired.  Backstage 
south  corridor  repaired  and  refinished. 

Opera  House 

1946 

Canopies  recovered.  Water  tanks  of  fire  pressure  system 
overhauled. 

Both  buildings 

1947 

Gilded  ornamentation,  ceiling,  and  walls  of  theater  and 
foyer  cleaned.  Drapes  cleaned  and  repaired.  Roof 
repaired. 

Opera  House 

CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


1947 

1947 


1947 

1951,  Sept.  8 
1956 

1956- 1957 

1957- 1958 

1957-1958 

1957- 1958 

1958- 1959 

1958- 1959 

1959- 1960 


Rooms  104  and  106  altered.  Basement  entrance  between  Veterans  Building 
kitchen  and  Room  1 altered. 


About  300  veterans’  and  patriotic  organizations  meet  in  Veterans  Building 
building  regularly.  Number  of  persons  using  the  building 
estimated  at  over  700,000.  Veterans  request  an  additional 
building. 

Extensive  alterations  to  fourth  floor.  Museum 


Signing  of  Treaty  granting  Japan  sovereignty 
Drawings  for  alterations  to  basement  meeting  room. 
Ventilation  improvements. 


Opera  House 
Veterans  Building 
Veterans  Building 


Building  improvements  for  Museum.  More  ventilation  Veterans  Building 
improvements. 

Canopy  replaced.  Exterior 


Floors  refinished. 


Opera  House 


Gunite  put  in  attic  and  a few  other  spaces  to  eliminate  Both  buildings 
water  seepage  ($50,183). 


"Improvements"  ($26,904). 


Museum  on  fourth  floor 


Exterior  repaired  and  steam-cleaned  ($3,218).  New  Opera  House 
coverings  for  auditorium  seats  ($2,716). 


Figure  7 - Construction;  Exterior,  1932 


BACKGROUND 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERAHOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


1961-1962 

Structural  improvements. 

Museum 

1962-1963 

Study  and  discussion  of  more  space  for  Museum. 

Veterans  Building 

1963 

New  acoustic  shell  for  symphonic  performances,  by  SOM 
and  acoustician  Heinrich  Keilholz-urethane  foam  covered 
with  fiberglass. 

Opera  House 

1964 

New  suspended  ceiling  and  lighting,  Room  123. 

Veterans  Building 

1964 

Alterations  and  additions  to  women’s  toilets. 

Opera  House 

1965 

"Report  on  Rehabilitation  and  Modernization  of  San 
Francisco’s  War  Memorial  Center,"  by  Wurster,  Bemardi 
& Emmons,  and  Skidmore,  Owings  &.  Merrill. 

Both  buildings  and  across 
Franklin  Street 

1965 

Service  bar  in  Green  Room  added. 

Veterans  Building 

1966 

New  suspended  ceiling  Room  1 10.  Paint  lobby,  vestibules, 
and  galleries. 

Veterans  Building 

1966 

Drawing  for  bar  sink  replacement. 

Opera  House  basement 

CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993  HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


1967 

Carpenter’s  Shop  moved  off-site  to  clear  space  for  Opera 
Company  offices. 

Opera  House,  backstage, 
3rd  floor  north 

1967 

Civic  Grand  Jury  recommend  study  of  "more  rational  and 
equitable  use  of  space"  because  of  decreasing  use  by 
veterans’  organizations. 

Veterans  Building 

1967 

Drawings  for  electrical  system  repair  and  replacement. 

Veterans  Building 

1967 

New  fourth  floor  created  in  former  Carpenter’s  Shop;  new 
company  offices  and  toilets  in  same. 

Opera  House,  backstage, 
3rd  and  4th  floors  north 

1967 

New  passenger  elevator  shaft,  with  lobbies  for  it  on 
mezzanine  and  second  floors. 

Opera  House,  backstage 
north 

1967 

Intercom,  paging,  and  closed  circuit  TV  systems  for 
performers.  Dressing  rooms  rehabilitated.  New  stage 
lighting  and  rigging. 

Opera  House,  backstage 

1967 

Spotlights  enclosed. 

Opera  House,  auditorium 
walls 

1967 

Acoustic  tile  installed. 

Opera  House  bar  areas 

1967 

Guard  railings  for  tapestries.  Drawings  for  refinishing 
bronze  doors. 

Opera  House 

1967 

Sculpture  Court  (Rotunda)  ceiling  modernized.  Storage 
and  exhibit  handling  area  remodeled. 

Museum 

1967  or  1968 

New  offices  for  Symphony  added. 

Veterans  Building,  1st 
floor 

1969 

Kitchen  renovated. 

Veterans  Building 

1969 

New  gold  curtain  and  its  machinery  installed. 

Opera  House 

1969 

Galleries  renovated. 

Museum 

1969 

Ornamental  iron  fence  refinished. 

Memorial  Court 

1969-1970 

Drawings  for  cleaning  interior  cast  stone. 

Veterans  Building 

1970,  Feb.  11 

War  Memorial  Board  allocates  to  the  Museum  the  whole 
third  floor,  Room  134,  and  a Van  Ness  Avenue  entrance. 

Veterans  Building 

1970,  September 

Drawings  for  Men’s  Club  remodeling. 

Veterans  Building 

1970,  October 

Drawings  for  backstage  rehabilitation. 

Opera  House 

1974 

Fire  alarm  system  expanded. 

Veterans  Building 

1975 

Safety  modification  to  freight  elevator.  Existing  ticket 
office  altered. 

Veterans  Building 

c.  1975 

Addition(s)  to  Museum  storage. 

Veterans  Building  base- 

ment 


BACKGROUND 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


1976,  Sept. 

1976 

1977 


Addition  on  Franklin  Street  completed  (see  figures  9 and  Opera  House 

ID  • 


Front  stairs  repaired.  Opera  House 

Control  of  Green  Room  (originally  called  the  Library)  and  Veterans  Building 
the  auditorium  passes  from  the  American  Legion  War 
Memorial  Committee  to  the  War  Memorial  Board  of 
Trustees. 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC 


1978,  June  21 


1980 

1980 

1980- Sept.  13 

1981- Oct. 
1983 

1983 

1984 

1986 

1987 

c.  1987 
1989,  Oct.  18 

1990 

1991 


Herbst  Hall  dedicated:  reworking  of  Veterans  Auditori- 
um, 915  seats,  permanent  rake  of  floor,  new  boxes, 
Brangwyn  murals  cleaned,  former  basement  space  for  floor 
machinery  turned  into  Lower  Lounge. 

Interior  cleaning  ($31,850). 

Lobby  renovated.  Art  vault  in  Rooms  1 and  2 renovated. 
Davies  Symphony  Hall  completed. 

Zellerbach  Rehearsal  Hall  completed. 

"Exterior  restoration"  ($369,567). 

Ballet  Association  Building. 

North  freight  elevator  replaced.  Terra  cotta  repaired. 
Auditorium  seats  reupholstered. 

Fence  repainted  and  gold  leafed. 

New  kitchen  in  lower  lounge. 

Loma  Prieta  Earthquake 

Emergency  earthquake  repairs,  ($111,869). 

New  chairs  for  boxes. 


STRUCTURE  REPORT 

Veterans  Building 

Opera  House 
Veterans  Building 
Van  Ness/Grove 
Symphony  Hall 
Opera  House 
455  Franklin  Street 
Opera  House 
Opera  House 
Memorial  Court 
Opera  House 

Opera  House 
Opera  House 


BACKGROUND 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERAHOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


EVALUATION  METHODOLOGY 


Prior  to  conducting  the  field  investigation,  Carey  & 
Co.  developed  specific  criteria  for  the  evaluation  of 
the  Opera  House.  This  was  developed  to  provide  a 
systematic  framework  for  the  evaluation  and  a way 
to  assess  a multitude  of  building  components  with 
different  historic  values  and  in  varying  degrees  of 
deterioration.  At  the  same  time,  it  allows  future 
users  of  the  document  to  quickly  find  information 
on  building  components. 

EVALUATION  RATINGS 

First  the  firm  determined  the  historic  value  or  sig- 
nificance of  the  component  on  a four-point  scale 
ranging  from  very  significant  to  noncontributing. 
Once  the  significance  was  established,  the  firm 
determined  the  condition,  or  degree  to  which  his- 
toric fabric  had  deteriorated  or  been  altered.  The 
condition  rating  is  a five  point  scale  ranging  from 
excellent  to  unknown.  Finally,  Carey  & Co.  rated 
the  priority  or  importance  of  addressing  any  given 
deficiency  on  a three-point  scale  ranging  from 
critical  to  minor. 

Historic  Value 

Historic  Value  entails  a professional  judgment  of  the 
historic  importance  of  each  component  based  upon 
research  in  historic  documents  and  on-site  observa- 
tion. There  are  four  ratings: 

Very  Significant  - The  space  or  components  are 
central  to  the  building’s  architectural  and  historic 
character. 

Significant  - The  space  or  components  are  associat- 
ed with  the  qualities  that  make  the  building  histori- 
cally significant.  They  make  a major  contribution  to 
the  structure’s  historic  character. 

Contributing  - The  space  or  components  may  not 
be  extraordinarily  significant  as  isolated  elements  but 


contain  sufficient  historic  character  to  play  a role  in 
the  overall  significance  of  the  structure. 
Noncontributing  - The  space  or  components  are  not 
historic,  or  are  historic  but  have  been  substantially 
modified.  Little  or  no  historic  character  remains. 

Condition 

Condition  describes  the  degree  of  fitness  of  rooms  or 
components: 

Excellent  - The  space  or  components  are  in  virtual- 
ly original  condition. 

Good  — The  space  or  components  are  intact  and 
sound.  Few  imperfections  are  visible,  and  they 
require  only  minor  repair  work. 

Fair  - The  space  or  components  show  signs  of  wear 
or  deterioration. 

Poor  - The  space  or  components  are  no  longer 
performing  their  original  function  or  are  missing. 
Unknown  - The  space  or  components  are  inaccessi- 
ble and  condition  cannot  be  assessed. 

Priority 

Priority  provides  a measure  of  each  deficiency  and 
shows  the  importance  of  correcting  deficiencies. 
Critical  - Advanced  deterioration  is  present  or  will 
occur  if  the  deficiency  is  left  uncorrected.  Critical 
may  also  signify  that  the  deficiency  is  causing  ad- 
vanced deterioration  of  adjacent  or  related  building 
materials,  or  poses  a threat  to  life  safety. 

Serious  - Deterioration  will  result  in  failure  or  will  ! 
threaten  life  safety  if  not  corrected  within  two  to 
five  years.  Serious  may  also  signify  that  failure  to  I 
correct  the  deficiency  will  cause  deterioration  of 
adjacent  or  related  building  materials. 

Minor  - Routine  maintenance  and  conservation 
methods  may  have  not  been  followed.  Minor  defi- 
ciencies do  not  affect  other  building  materials. 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


EXTERIOR  EVALUATION 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


ARCHITECTURAL  DESCRIPTION 


ORIGINAL  BUILDING 

The  following  exterior  building  description  of  the 
San  Francisco  Opera  House  is  taken  from  the 
National  Register  of  Historic  Places  Inventory  - 
Nomination  Form. 

“The  War  Memorial  - The  San  Francisco  War 
Memorial  consists  of  a pair  of  identical  monumental 
classical  structures,  the  Opera  House  (301  Van  Ness 
Avenue)  and  the  Veterans  Building  (401  Van  Ness 
Avenue)  on  either  side  of  a formal  court.  The 
complex  is  set  in  a double  block  bounded  by  Van 
Ness,  McAllister,  Franklin,  and  Grove  Streets,  and 
faces  the  City  Hall  across  Van  Ness  Avenue. 

The  Opera  House  is  erected  on  a steel  frame  with 
reinforced  concrete  floors  and  walls.  It  is  clad  in 
terra  cotta  simulating  Raymond  granite  used  in  its 
base,  steps,  and  columns.  The  building  is  generally 
rectangular  in  shape  except  for  a high  scenery  loft 
at  the  rear  and  a pair  of  staircase  wings  which 


project  from  the  sides  near  enough  to  the  front 
that  they  appear  as  receding  planes  of  the  main 
facade.  There  are  four  principal  stories  above 
ground  and  a mansard  roof  (see  figures  10,  12,  13, 
14,  and  15). 

The  building  is  a late  and  rather  severe  example  of 
the  Beaux  Arts  style  with  decorative  treatment 
encircling  the  building  at  all  levels.  The  ground 
floor  base  is  deeply  rusticated  and  cut  with  ranges 
of  arches.  The  two-story  superstructure  has  a 
rusticated  wall  of  lower  definition  and  the  same 
ranges  of  arches  everywhere  except  the  front 
facade  which  is  more  elaborately  designed.  The 
attic  is  set  back  behind  a balustrade,  and  a man- 
sard roof  caps  the  whole.  Details  of  both  orna- 
ment and  function  are  everywhere  masterfully 
executed. 

The  principal  forward  facade  on  Van  Ness  Avenue 


Figure  10  - War  Memorial  Opera  Hause,  ca.  1932 


EXTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


is  reached  by  a series  of  long  granite  steps.  The 
facade  contains  seven  arches  in  the  base,  glazed, 
and  fitted  with  handsome  bronze  and  iron  frames. 
The  five  central  arches  serve  as  the  main  public  en- 
trances to  the  building  and  the  other  two,  partially 
infilled,  as  secondary  service  entrances  to  ticket 
offices.  Each  arch  is  defined  by  voussoirs  and 
ornamental  keystones  with  masks  of  lions’  heads. 
The  central  and  outer  keystones  also  serve  as 
brackets  for  protruding  balconies  in  the  next  level. 
There  are  eight  bronze  sconces  in  the  spandrels,  and 
a flat  belt  course  runs  above  the  base. 

In  the  superstructure,  eight  large  pairs  of  free- 
standing, fluted  doric  columns  rise  over  the  piers 
between  the  arches  below  that  flank  seven  recessed 
arches  just  behind  them.  Each  arch  is  outlined  with 
a curved  ornamental  molding  and  capped  with  a 
simple  ornamental  keystone  flanked  by  swags.  The 
two  outer  arches  are  sculptural  niches;  the  five 
inner  arches  open  back  to  an  open  vaulted  vestibule 
with  five  glazed  arches  to  the  mezzanine  foyer.  At 
the  base  of  the  columns  is  an  interrupted  balustrade, 
segments  of  which  protrude  as  shallow  balconies  at 
the  central  and  two  outside  bays.  Above  the 
columns  is  a simple  entablature  crowned  with  an 
interrupted  balustrade. 

Set  back  behind  the  crowning  balustrade  is  a short 
rectilinear  attic  floor  with  windows  behind  each 
section  of  balustrade.  The  wall  terminates  in  a 
stylized  frieze  incised  with  a wave  design  exactly  like 
its  counterpart  on  the  City  Hall.  Above  the  attic 
floor  is  a leaded  copper  mansard  roof,  striated  with 
vertical  expansion  joints  and  culminating  in  a simple 
roll  molding. 

Slightly  set  back  from  the  main  facade  and  protrud- 
ing out  of  the  north  and  south  sides  of  the  building 
from  ground  to  roof  are  two  vertical  staircase 
cavities.  For  the  most  part  they  are  simply  treated, 


with  the  basic  rusticated  background  wall  textures 
of  the  main  facade  standing  out  as  the  principal 
feature  of  interest.  The  transition  from  front 
facade  to  staircase  wing  is  accomplished  in  a series 
of  folding  planes  of  this  basic  wall  texture.  There 
are  three  square  windows  in  a vertical  line  on  both 
east  and  west  walls  of  the  wing.  On  the  outside  of 
each  wing,  there  is  a glazed  arch  in  the  base  and  a 
more  elaborate  motif  in  the  superstructure  with 
two  pairs  of  doric  pilasters  flanking  a sculptural 
niche  with  a balustrade. 

The  court  side  of  the  Opera  House  consists  of  a 
rusticated  wall  with  ten  arches  ranged  across  each 
tier  from  the  staircase  wing  to  the  rear  of  the 
building.  Each  arch  in  the  base  has  a lion  masked 
keystone  and  bronze  sconces  in  the  spandrels.  The 
five  forward  arches  are  completely  glazed 
entrances;  the  rear  arches  are  infilled  except  for 
windows  and  a door  in  the  last  arch.  The  arches 
in  the  superstructure  are  set  in  an  ornamental 
molding  with  a balustrade  at  the  base. 

The  Grove  Street  side  of  the  Opera  is  identical  to 
the  court  side  with  the  addition  of  a marquee 
cantilevered  over  a circular  driveway  which  runs 
the  length  of  the  building.  The  marquee  is  made 
of  wood  and  sheeted  with  copper.  It  is  suspended 
from  rods  attached  to  the  spandrels  between  the 
arches  and  is  attached  to  the  building  at  the 
impost. 

The  rear  of  the  Opera  House  (now  obscured  by 
the  new  addition)  is  dominated  by  a large  arch 
that  cuts  through  the  base  and  superstructure  with 
two  smaller  arches  on  either  side  in  each  tier.  The 
main  arch  springs  from  the  coursing  between  the 
two  levels  and  is  topped  by  an  ornamental  key- 
stone. Huge  sliding  metal-plated  doors  in  the  arch 
accommodate  Opera  scenery.  Between  the  top  of 
this  arch  and  the  entablature  above  is  a large, 
rectangular  horizontal  panel. 


20 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Above  the  Opera  House  in  the  rear  is  the  large 
scenery  loft  which,  like  the  building  itself,  is  divided 
by  a coursing  into  two  principal  rusticated  wall 
sections.  The  front  and  rear  are  incised  by  large 
rectangular  panels  in  the  center,  flanked  by  smaller 
vertical  panels  which  contain  pedimented  windows 
with  protruding  balustraded  balconies  carried  on 
brackets.  The  narrower  north  and  south  ends  of  the 
loft  have  a similar  arrangement  of  unadorned  panels. 
There  is  a simple  cornice  at  the  top  of  the  wall 
surmounted  by  a mansard  roof. 


Alterations 

In  1976  an  addition  was  constructed  on  the  rear  of 
the  Opera  House  at  the  Franklin  Street  elevation 
(see  figure  11).  It  provides  additional  space  for 
stage  scenery  and  offices.  The  four-story  addition 
is  approximately  154’  x 58’  and  mimics  the  original 
Opera  House  in  form  and  ornamentation.  The 
walls  above  the  granite  base  are,  however,  clad  in 
large  pre-cast  concrete  panels  and  not  terra  cotta 
as  in  the  original  structure.  All  windows  in  the 
addition  are  aluminum. 


The  War  Memorial  Court  occupies  the  area  be- 
tween the  Opera  House  and  the  Veterans  Building. 
It  is  enclosed  on  its  east  and  west  sides  by  blue  and 
gold  ornamental  iron  fencing  between  the  two 
buildings.  A U-shaped  driveway  passes  along  its 
edges,  from  Franklin  Street  to  the  forward  fence 
between  the  building  wings  and  returns  to  Franklin 
Street.  The  area  enclosed  by  the  driveway  consists 
of  a central  lawn  encircled  by  a sidewalk  lined  with 
box  hedges  and  sycamore  trees,  and  lighted  by 
ornamental  lamps  of  iron." 


Large  two-story  galvanized  metal  doors  are  placed 
on  the  east  and  west  elevation  providing  access  for 
oversized  opera  scenery.  The  south  elevation  is 
articulated  with  seven  recessed  arches  with  lions’ 
head  keystones  up  to  the  second-story  level.  A 
large  arched  aluminum  window  is  inset  into  each 
arch.  The  granite  is  built  out  at  the  base  of  the 
arches  to  form  benches.  Bronze  light  sconces 
similar  to  the  bronze  fixtures  on  the  original 
structure  are  placed  on  each  elevation  of  the  new 
addition. 


Figure  11-  1976  Addition;  1993 


EXTERIOR  EVALUATION 


July  9,: 


RANC1SCO  opera  house 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


[OPERA  HOUSE  | 


FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE  July  9,  1993  HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


[OPERA  HOUSE  1 


EXTERIOR  EVALUATION 


CAHEY 


EXTERIOR  EVALUATION 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


EXISTING  CONDITION 

The  building  exterior  was  surveyed  from  the  ground 
and  the  loggia  balcony  at  close  range  and  with 
binoculars.  A description  of  the  general  condition 
of  all  exterior  building  materials  is  presented  below. 
Due  to  the  general  nature  of  this  exterior  evaluation 
and  the  integrity  of  the  existing  facade  materials, 
Carey  &.  Co.  assigned  the  entire  exterior  of  the 
Opera  House  a single  historic  value  rating  of  very 
significant.  Condition  ratings  for  each  material  are 
noted  in  this  section.  The  Exterior  Recommenda- 
tions section  establishes  a priority  rating  for  each 
material  and  includes  proposed  repair  methods  for 
material  deficiencies. 

MAIN  FACADES 

Historic  Value : Very  Significant 
The  Van  Ness  Avenue,  Grove  Street,  Franklin 
Street,  and  the  Memorial  Court  (north)  elevations 
are  constructed  of  terra-cotta  ashlar  units  with  a 
granite  base,  columns,  and  monumental  entry  steps 
(see  figures  12,  13,  14,  and  15).  The  windows  are 
steel  with  a variety  of  types  of  clear  and  obscure 
glazing.  Bronze  window  surrounds  occur  at  the  first 
floor,  all  others  are  steel.  The  exterior  walls  on  the 
1976  Addition  (Franklin  Street,  and  west  ends  of 
the  Grove  Street  and  the  Memorial  Court  eleva- 
tions) are  clad  in  pre-cast  concrete  panels  with 
ornamentation  matching  the  original  structure.  The 
mansard  roof  on  both  the  addition  and  original 
structure  are  covered  with  lead  coated  copper. 
Bronze  elements  in  the  form  of  doors,  window 
surrounds,  and  light  fixtures  exist  on  both  the 
original  structure  and  the  addition.  Windows  in  the 
original  structure  are  steel  and  in  the  addition  are 
aluminum.  The  Van  Ness  Avenue  and  the  Memo- 
rial Court  elevations  have  galvanized-metal  awnings 
at  each  entry  door.  A large  copper-clad  wooden 
marquee  occurs  over  the  first-floor  entrance  on  the 
Grove  Street  elevation. 


Terra  Cotta 

Condition:  Good 

The  terra-cotta  cladding  on  the  Opera  House 
appears  to  be  in  good  condition  based  upon  a 
visual  survey  from  the  ground.  There  are 
numerous  small  spalls  and  cracks,  especially 
adjacent  to  mortar  joints  (see  figure  16).  Some 
terra-cotta  glaze  is  missing  primarily  on  units  at  the 
roof  line.  Early  repairs  to  the  terra  cotta  are 
evident  and  appear  to  be  in  sound  condition. 


Granite 

Condition:  Good 

The  granite  Opera  House  base,  columns,  and  stairs 
at  the  main  entrance  appear  to  be  in  good  condi- 
tion as  surveyed  at  close  range.  Deterioration  is 
limited  to  open  mortar  joints,  small  amounts  of 
organic  growth,  and  general  soiling  (see  figure  1 7) . 


Figure  17-  Soiled  Granite 


EXTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Bronze  Elements 

Condition:  Good 

Bronze  elements  include  doors,  window  surrounds, 
and  light  fixtures.  The  bronze  doors  and  light  fix- 
tures are  in  good  condition  as  surveyed  at  close 
range.  They  exhibit  a surface  patina  that  is  typical 
for  the  age  of  the  material.  Some  of  the  lanterns  on 
the  light  fixtures  are  missing  glazed  panels.  The 
bronze  window  surrounds  are  in  good  condition  with 
only  small  amounts  of  surface  soiling. 

Copper 

Condition:  Fair 

The  marquee  on  the  Grove  Street  elevation  is  only 
in  fair  condition  as  it  has  a variety  of  conservation 
problems.  The  copper  material  is  raised  and 
separated  in  places  and  heavily  corroded  at  the  eave 
line.  The  wooden  sub-structure  is  exposed  in  some 
areas. 

Steel  Windows 

Condition:  Good 

Steel  sash  windows  and  frames  occur  on  all 
elevations  of  the  original  structure.  They  were 
surveyed  from  the  ground  and  at  close  range  from 
the  interior.  They  contain  a variety  of  clear  and  ob- 
scure glazing,  some  of  which  is  original.  The  steel 
windows  and  frames  have  been  well  maintained  and 
deterioration  is  limited  to  minor  corrosion  and  small 
amounts  of  flaking  paint. 

Cast-Iron 

Condition:  Good 

Cast-iron  is  used  only  for  the  ornamental  fence.  All 
cast-iron  elements  have  been  well-maintained  and 
appear  to  be  in  good  condition  as  surveyed  at  close 
range.  The  fence  has  multiple  layers  of  paint  which 
serve  to  protect  the  ferrous  metal,  but  also  obscure 
some  ornamental  detailing. 


Galvanized  Metal 

Condition:  Good 

Galvanized  metal  elements  include  awnings  and 
window  panels.  Awnings  constructed  of  galvanized 
metal  occur  at  several  main  entrance  doors  and 
serve  to  protect  opera  patrons  from  the  elements. 
These  awnings  are  not  original  to  the  structure  but 
are  largely  in  good  condition  as  surveyed  from  the 
ground.  Deterioration  to  the  awnings,  as  well  as  to 
the  inset  window  panels  below  the  cast-iron  and 
bronze  window  surrounds,  is  limited  to  minor 
amounts  of  corrosion  and  flaking  paint. 

Pre-Cast  Concrete  Panels 

Condition:  Good 

The  1976  Addition  is  clad  with  pre-cast  concrete 
panels  which  imitate  the  terra-cotta  cladding  on 
the  original  structure  in  color  and  texture.  The 
pre-cast  concrete  elements  are  generally  in  good 
condition  with  the  exception  of  heavy  soiling  on 
the  cornice  (see  figure  18)  and  some  staining 
beneath  the  bronze  light  fixtures  on  the  west 
elevation. 


Aluminum  Windows 

Condition:  Good 

The  aluminum  windows  on  the  1976  Addition 
appear  to  be  in  good  condition  and  exhibit  no 
deficiencies  as  surveyed  from  the  ground. 


28 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Open  Mortar  Joints 

Condition:  Good 

The  mortar  joints  on  the  terra  cotta,  granite,  and 
pre-cast  concrete  panels  are  generally  in  good 
condition.  In  a few  areas,  especially  where  previous 
repairs  exist,  joints  are  open  or  the  mortar  is 
deteriorating  (see  figures  19).  Some  mortar  joints 
may  have  failed  as  a result  of  the  Loma  Prieta 
earthquake. 


Figure  19  - Open  Mortar  Joints  and  Soiling 


EXTERIOR  EVALUATION 


29 


Recommendations  Appendix 


interior  Evaluation  Recommendations  Appendix 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


ARCHITECTURAL  DESCRIPTION 


The  following  interior  building  description  of  the 
San  Francisco  Opera  House  is  taken  from  the 
National  Register  of  Historic  Places  Inventory  - 
Nomination  Form. 

“The  interior  of  the  Opera  House  is  everywhere 
clearly  and  efficiently  organized,  and  its  decorative 
treatment  is  always  direct  and  in  the  service  of  the 
functions  of  the  building.  Within  the  tradition  of 
Opera  Houses,  it  is  not  lavish,  yet  there  is  an 
appropriate  sense  of  richness  about  it  that  is 
achieved  principally  through  the  correct  use  of 
classical  elements  and  the  fine  treatment  of  details. 
The  simplicity  and  proportions  of  the  ceremonial 
spaces  are  such  as  to  appear  equally  appropriate  to 
a monumental  exterior. 

The  main  Van  Ness  Avenue  entrances  open  onto 
a simple  vaulted  vestibule  where  tickets  are  sold  in 
windows  at  either  end.  The  entrance  vestibule 
opens  onto  a grand  foyer  across  the  front  of  the 
building,  with  stairs  rising  from  either  end  in  the 
wings,  and  corridors  running  off  down  the  sides  of 
the  building.  This  organization  is  repeated  with 
modifications  at  three  higher  levels.  The  west  end 
of  the  building  has  dressing  rooms  and  offices  at  all 
levels.  The  basement  has  a bar,  buffet,  and  small 
emergency  hospital.” 

A detailed  architectural  description  of  interior 
rooms,  significant  finishes  and  elements  follows.  It 
is  divided  into:  Primary  Spaces,  describing  very 

significant  areas;  Room  Types,  describing  typical 
categories  of  rooms;  and  Significant  Components, 
describing  original  significant  finishes  and  elements. 
A Floor-by-Floor  Analysis  follows,  describing  the 
historic  value,  condition  and  extant  alterations  in 
individual  rooms 


PRIMARY  SPACES 

The  Opera  House  has  the  following  very  significant 
spaces  that  are  unique  within  the  building. 

■ Lobby  - Room  101 

■ Foyer  - Rooms  102,  119,  120 

■ Main  House  - Rooms  103,  104,  105,  M43-M67, 
204,  303,  304,  406,  502,  601,  602 

■ Stage  - Rooms  106,  107,  167,  168 

■ Loggia  - Rooms  201,  201 A,  20 IB, 

■ Board  Room  - Room  401 


Figure  20  - Lobby 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Lobby 

Along  the  principal  Van  Ness  Avenue  entrances, 
the  main  lobby  is  a simple  vestibule  with  groin- 
vaulted  ceilings  and  ticket  windows  at  each  end 
(see  figure  20).  Floors  are  checkerboard  light  and 
medium  rose  marble  with  medium  rose  border  and 
base.  Bronze-reeded  handrails  occur  at  each  ticket 
window  with  bronze  pendant  lanterns  at  each  groin 
vault.  The  cast-stone  walls  are  articulated  with 
five  arched  openings  that  separate  the  lobby  from 
the  foyer  with  elaborate  bronze  gates  in  each 
opening  (see  figure  59). 

Foyer 

The  foyer  is  the  most  elaborate  room  outside  the 


main  house  (see  figure  21).  The  walls  are  a combi- 
nation of  cast-stone  and  plaster,  and  the  floors  are 
marble.  Twenty-four  large,  fluted  cast-stone  col- 
umns with  marble  bases  outline  the  rectangular 
room,  ten  on  each  long  side  and  two  on  each  short 
side.  The  columns  support  a projecting  denticulated 
cornice,  above  which  is  an  elaborate  barrel-vault 
ceiling.  The  ceiling  is  ornamented  by  cast-plaster 
octagons  with  central  wreaths  and  rosettes,  high- 
lighted with  gold  paint.  Five  cast-stone 
pedimented  openings  recessed  into  arches  open  into 
the  orchestra  seating  section  of  the  house.  The 
foyer  is  appointed  with  a variety  of  ornamental 
metal  sconces,  free-standing  lamp  posts,  hanging 
bronze  lanterns,  railings,  and  grilles. 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Main  House 

The  main  house  consists  of  one  large  volume 
punctuated  by  three  suspended  curving  balconies 
(see  figures  22,  23  and  24).  It  is  the  most  elabo- 
rate and  highly  ornamented  space  in  the  Opera 
House.  Above  the  main  floor  orchestra  seating, 
the  three  balcony  tiers  span  wall  to  wall  cantile- 
vered into  the  main  seating.  The  lowest  tier  at  the 
mezzanine  level  is  horseshoe-shaped  and  has  box 
seating.  The  dress  circle  occurs  above  with  front 
balustrade  and  intermediate  panels  hiding  recessed 
spot  lights.  The  uppermost  tier  is  the  upper  and 
lower  balcony  seating  and  has  simple  molded 
plaster  front.  Total  seating  capacity  is  3302. 

The  stage,  at  the  east  end  of  the  main  house  is 
marked  by  a massive  proscenium  arch  which  spans 
from  fluted  pilasters  at  each  end.  The  arch  is 
decorated  by  highly  ornamented  cast  plaster  mold- 
ings, highlighted  with  gold  leaf.  Gold  leaf  statuary 
groups  by  Edgar  Walter  occur  in  the  spandrel 
panels. 


The  side  walls  are  constructed  of  rusticated  cast- 
stone  below  the  dress  circle  with  flat  and  molded 
plaster  walls  above  and  at  the  rear.  Three  large 
arches  with  central  festooned  keystones  punctuate 
the  north  and  south  walls.  Each  of  the  arched 
openings  is  infilled  with  a balustrade  and  a plaster 
screen  wall  and  heavy  curtains. 

At  the  ceiling  a projecting  cornice  is  constructed  of 
ornamented  plaster  moldings  highlighted  in  gold 
leaf  similar  to  the  proscenium  arch.  The  walls  and 
ceilings  in  the  balconies  are  simple  flat  plaster  with 
vertical  bands  of  trim  dividing  the  walls  into  panels. 
Wall  sconces  occur  periodically  along  these  walls 
between  the  trim.  Lighting  for  the  upper  balcony 
is  provided  by  recessed  octagonal  fixtures. 

The  plaster  ceiling  above  the  orchestra  floor  has  a 
large  recessed  oval,  also  highly  decorated  with  cast 
plaster  ornamentation.  A chandelier  in  the  shape 
of  a sunburst,  27  feet  in  diameter,  is  suspended 
from  the  center  of  the  ceiling  oval. 


Figure  22  - Main  House,  Opening  Night 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Figure  24  - Main  House 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Stage 

The  stage  itself  is  equipped  with  the  most  advanced 
features  available  in  1932.  The  stage  could  origi- 
nally be  raised  and  lowered  in  whole  or  in  part,  and 
the  scenery  is  conveniently  stored  in  the  loft  above 
the  stage.  The  wood  floors  are  tongue- and-groove 
joined.  Walls  and  ceilings  are  exposed  concrete 
with  sprinklers  and  piping. 

The  stage  apparatus  consists  of  lines  and  counter- 
weights along  the  walls,  extending  through  the  fly 
galleries  (see  figure  42).  There  are  also  the  pin 
rails  located  at  the  fly  gallery  railings.  The  lighting 
is  suspended  from  the  ceiling,  catwalks,  and  gaffs. 
Trap  doors  and  hatches  are  scattered  throughout 
the  stage  area. 


at  the  second  floor  in  the  Van  Ness  Avenue  elevat- 
ion immediately  above  the  lobby  (see  figure  25).  It 
is  enclosed  by  eight  large  pairs  of  free-standing 
doric  columns  with  arches  and  projecting  balconies 
between  each  pair.  Floors  are  quarry  tile,  and  step 
down  at  each  balcony  to  a terra-cotta  balustrade. 
The  walls  are  clad  with  exterior,  architectural  terra 
cotta  units  resembling  the  gray  granite  of  other 
Civic  Center  buildings.  Blind  windows  filled  with 
obscure  glazing  occur  along  the  interior  west  wall 
and  have  casements  allowing  access  into  the  ple- 
num space  surrounding  the  foyer  ceiling.  The 
ceiling  is  cement  plaster  groin  vaults  separated  by 
arches  at  each  bay.  Exterior  ornamental  light 
sconces  occur  at  the  west  wall  with  floor  mounted 
flood  lights. 


Loggia 

The  loggia  is  an  exterior  two-story  volume  located 


Two  exterior  vestibules  flank  the  primary  loggia 
space.  Finishes  are  the  same  except  for  the  ceilings 


Figure  25  - Loggia 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  Appendix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 
which  are  finished  in  architectural  terra  cotta. 
Board  Room 

The  War  Memorial  Board  Room  is  located  central- 
ly on  the  fourth  floor  Van  Ness  Avenue  elevation, 
immediately  above  the  loggia  (see  figure  26).  This 
highly  elaborate,  rectangular  room  is  located  within 
the  suite  of  offices  below  the  balcony  east  of  the 
house.  Floors  are  covered  with  carpet,  bordered 
with  marble.  Walls  consist  of  an  elaborate  wood 
base  and  paneled  wainscot.  The  walls  above  are 
plaster  and  meet  the  ceiling  with  an  elaborate 
crown  molding.  The  plaster  ceiling  has  a central 


July  9.  1993 

raised  oval  incorporating  bronze  mechanical  grilles 
at  the  north  and  south  ends. 

French  windows,  set  in  a deep  reveal  occur  at  the 
exterior  east  wall  with  six-panel  wood  doors  on  the 
other  three  walls.  Doors  and  windows  have  elabo- 
rate matching  wood  surrounds  with  additional 
heavy  cornice  caps  at  the  north  and  south  doors  to 
the  flanking  anterooms.  Light  fixtures  consist  of 
two-candle  brass  wall  sconces  along  all  walls. 
Ornate  register  grilles  occur  high  in  the  west  wall 
and  within  the  east  wall  wainscot  for  built-in 
radiators. 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


ROOM  TYPES 

Rooms  other  than  the  primary  spaces  previously 
described  fall  into  one  of  three  functional  categories 
and  can  be  characterized  by  one  of  fifteen  room 
types: 

■ Circulation/Public  Spaces 
Promenades 
Stair  Halls 
Corridors 
Passages 
Vestibules 
Stairs 
Elevators 


■ Utility  Spaces 

Toilet  Rooms 
Backstage  Areas 
Closets 
Utility  Rooms 
Unimproved  Areas 

CIRCULATION  & PUBLIC  SPACES 

Promenades 

The  promenades  form  the  major  public  circulation 
areas  at  the  front  house.  There  are  four  promenade 
types  differentiated  by  material  configuration 
representing  their  hierarchy. 


■ Work  Rooms 
Offices 

Dressing  Rooms 
Lounges 


Basement  Promenade 

The  basement  promenade  is  a simple,  rectilinear 
hall  facilitating  table  settings  for  the  adjacent  bar 
and  buffet  to  the  west  (see  figure  27).  Floors  are 
delineated  by  rusticated  plaster  piers  from  umber 
quarry  tile  at  north  and  south  ends,  to  natural  and 


Figure  27  - Basement  Promenade 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  Appendix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


stained  herring-bone-pattern  wood  at  the  central 
promenade  area.  A black  marble  floor  border 
occurs  throughout  butting  an  8-inch-high  rose 
marble  base.  Walls  are  rusticated  plaster  capped 
with  a plaster  cornice.  The  ceiling  is  applied  acous- 
tic tiles  over  the  original  flat  plaster.  Original 
ceiling-mounted  sunburst  light  fixtures  occur 
throughout  with  opera-glass  fixtures  at  the  north 
and  south  ends.  Original  projecting,  wall-mounted 
brorue  signs  and  cast-concrete  ventilation  grilles 
are  contributing  components. 


passenger  elevators  at  the  east  end  of  each  prome- 
nade. 

The  floor  is  light  rose  marble  tile  with  a medium 
rose  border  and  adjacent  base.  The  walls  are 
finished  with  rusticated  plaster  and  a simple  pro- 
filed plaster  cornice.  The  ceiling  is  a simple  flat 
plaster  finish.  Light  fixtures  are  suspended  ornate 
opera-glass  fixtures.  Ornamental  bronze  ventilation 
grilles  and  projecting,  wall-mounted  bronze  “check 
room”  signs  are  also  significant. 


First-Floor  Promenade 

The  promenades  at  the  first  floor  flank  the  main 
house  to  the  north  and  south  (see  figure  28).  The 
prominent,  highly  ornate  foyer  connects  the  two  at 
the  east  end  of  the  house.  Main  stairways:  four 
total,  occur  at  the  ends  of  each  promenade,  facili- 
tating vertical  circulation  from  the  basement 
throughout  the  fourth  floor  in  addition  to  the  two 


Mezzanine  and  Second-Floor  Promenades 
These  promenades  are  above  the  first  floor  prom- 
enades with  the  mezzanine  promenades  opening 
into  the  foyer  and  the  second  floor  promenades 
connected  by  a passage  above  the  foyer  (see  figure 
30). 

Floors  are  umber  quarry  tile  with  black  marble 


Figure  28  - First-Floor  Promenade 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Figure  30  - Second-Floor  Promenade 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  Appendix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


border.  The  rusticated  plaster  walls  have  a light 
rose  marble  base  and  are  capped  with  a simple 
plaster  comice.  The  ceiling  finish  is  flat  plaster. 

Fixed  and  casement  steel  sash  windows  occur  at 
the  second  floor  landings.  Here  there  are  bronze 
handrails.  Mezzanine  light  fixtures  are  ceiling- 
mounted  sunburst  design.  Second-floor  light  fix- 
tures are  ceiling-mounted  and  suspended  opera- 
glass  fixtures.  Ornamental  bronze  ventilation  grilles 
and  projecting  bronze  signage  are  also  significant. 

Third - and  Fourth -Floor  Promenades 
The  promenades  of  the  third  and  fourth  floors  wrap 
around  the  periphery  of  the  house  (see  figures  29 
and  31).  At  the  third  floor,  the  north-south  con- 
necting promenade  provides  sufficient  room  to 
accommodate  a full  service  bar  at  the  west  wall 
while  the  east  wall  has  five  arched-steel  sash 
windows  adjoining  the  exterior  loggia. 


Floors  are  a checkerboard  pattern,  maroon  and 
black  mastic  rubber  tile  with  a black  border.  The 
fourth  floor  connecting  promenade  has  sloped  floors 
and  curved  walls.  Ceilings  are  a simple  flat  plaster 
finish. 

The  third  floor  has  four  arched-steel  sash  windows 
with  bronze  handrails  at  each  exterior  wall  in 
addition  to  the  loggia  windows.  The  fourth  floor 
has  two  layers  of  windows  lining  the  promenade: 
fixed  wood  windows  along  the  interior,  as  well  as 
exterior  steel-sash  casement  windows  adjacent  to 
the  window  access  space.  The  window  access  space 
runs  parallel  to  the  promenades  between  the 
interior  promenades  and  exterior  of  the  building. 
Lights  in  the  promenades  are  ceiling-mounted 
opera-glass  fixtures.  Ornamental  bronze  ventilation 
grilles  and  bronze  signage  are  also  significant. 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Stair  Halls 

Two  stair-hall  types,  promenade  and  front  house, 
are  differentiated  by  location  and  finish. 

Promenade  Stair  Halls 

The  stair  halls  at  the  west  end  of  each  promenade 
reflect  the  finish  materials  of  their  respective 
adjacent  promenade  rooms  (see  figure  32). 

Front  House  Stair  Halls 

Additional  stair  halls  are  located  in  the  front  cor- 
ners (northeast  and  southeast)  of  the  building  from 
the  basement  to  mezzanine  floors.  Designed  to 
accommodate  the  daily  circulation  to  the  basement, 
first  and  mezzanine  level  offices,  these  areas  are  fin- 
ished with  smooth  plaster  walls  and  ceilings.  Floor- 
ing varies  by  floor:  quarry  tile  at  the  basement, 
light  and  medium-colored  marble  tile  at  the  first 
floor,  and  checkerboard  rubber  tile  at  the  mezza- 
nine level.  Each  reflects  a continuation  from  the 


adjacent  promenade  areas. 

Corridors 

Two  types  of  corridors  are  found,  differentiated  by 
finish  material  and  location. 

Front  House  Corridors 

The  front  house  corridors  have  mastic  rubber  tile 
floors  with  marble  base.  Walls  are  flat  plaster. 
Ceilings  are  flat  plaster  finish  with  a run  plaster 
cornice.  These  corridors  have  original  heavy  porce- 
lain wall-mounted  drinking  fountains.  The  lighting 
is  non-contributing,  ceiling- mounted  fluorescent 
fixtures. 

Rear  House  Corridors 

The  rear  house  corridors  have  painted  concrete 
floors  and  bases.  Walls  are  plaster  with  either 
exposed  concrete  slab  and  beam  ceilings  in  the 
basement  areas,  or  flat  plaster  ceilings  at  the  upper 


Figure  32  - Mezzanine  Stair  Hall 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  Appendix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


floors.  Corridors  have  original  heavy  porcelain 
wall-mounted  drinking  fountains. 

Original  wall-mounted  brass  wall  sconces  still  exist 
at  some  locations  in  the  rear  house  corridors. 
Typically,  non-contributing  fluorescent  fixtures 
comprise  the  lighting,  though  original  ceiling 
mounted  fixtures  can  also  be  found  in  some  loca- 
tions. Additional  contributing  components  include 
original  wall-mounted  fire  hose  rack  and  hose  bib, 
sprinklers,  radiators,  and  wall-mounted  thermostats. 


Rear  House  Passages 

The  rear  house  passages  are  similar  to  the  basement 
corridors  in  their  finish.  The  flooring  consists  of 
painted  concrete  floors  and  base.  The  walls  and 
ceilings  are  typically  smooth  plaster  with  no  orna- 
ment, although  exposed  concrete  slab  and  beam 
ceilings  can  be  found  at  some  locations. 

Vestibules 

There  are  five  types  of  vestibules  in  the  Opera 
House. 


Passages 

The  passages  are  divided  into  front  house  and  rear 
house  passages  primarily  due  to  finish  and  location. 

Front  House  Passages 

The  front  house  passages  reflect  the  finishes  of 
their  adjoining  promenade. 


Entrance  Vestibules 

The  first  type  is  an  entrance  vestibule  at  the  first 
floor  ticket  offices.  These  lead  to  private  stairways 
accessing  the  small  offices  on  the  mezzanine  level 
and  the  basement  promenade.  Finishes  typically 
reflect  those  in  the  adjacent  promenade  areas: 
bronze  and  glass  entry  doors,  marble  floors  and 
base,  and  plaster  walls  and  ceilings. 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9.  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Toilet  Room  Vestibules 

The  second  type  is  the  small  room  adjacent  to 
toilet  rooms  at  the  basement  and  upper  balcony 
level.  Finishes  match  the  toilet  rooms  with  tile  floor 
and  wainscot,  plaster  upper  walls,  and  ceilings. 
The  lighting  is  simple  schoolhouse  fixtures. 

Smoking  Room  Vestibules 

The  third  type  is  an  entry  to  the  mezzanine  level 
men’s  smoking  room.  Finishes  are  similar  to  those 
found  in  the  adjacent  smoking  room.  The  floors  are 
quarry  tile.  The  walls  are  paneled:  wood  paneled 
dado  at  the  bottom,  and  canvassed  plaster  fields 
surrounded  with  wood  trim  at  the  upper  portion. 
The  walls  are  capped  with  a run-in-place  plaster 
cornice. 


Box  Vestibules 

The  fourth  type  are  the  box  vestibules  (see  figure 
34).  Located  on  the  mezzanine  level  only,  these 


Figure  34  - Typical  Box  Vestibule 


rooms  serve  as  anterooms  for  the  box  seats.  The 
floors  are  carpeted.  The  walls  are  paneled:  can- 
vassed plaster  fields  surrounded  with  wood  trim. 
The  ceilings  are  flat  plaster  finish  with  a run-in- 
place  plaster  cornice.  Other  trim  includes  profiled 
wood  base,  ornate  bronze  coat  hooks  and  bronze 
ventilation  grilles.  Lighting  consists  of  a sunburst 
fixture  with  bronze  fitter.  Heavy  velvet  curtains 
separate  the  box  vestibules  from  the  adjacent 
boxes. 

Rear  House  Vestibules 

The  fifth  type  is  a small  transition  passageway  be- 
tween the  front  house  and  rear  house.  Finishes  are 
similar  to  those  found  in  the  rear  house  areas: 
unfinished  concrete  floors,  concrete  base,  plaster 
walls  and  ceilings.  Adjoining  doorways  have  origi- 
nal, fuse-link  overhead  rolling,  swinging  and  sliding 
fire  doors.  Counter-weights  and  gravity  provide  the 
method  of  closure  for  the  doors. 


Figure  35  - Rear  Stairway 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Stairs 

Public  Stairway s 

Four  public  stairways  access  the  basement  through 
the  fourth  floor  areas  at  the  public  half  of  the 
building,  or  front  house.  Design  and  materials  are 
consistent,  with  the  exception  of  a higher  level  of 
finish  at  both  the  first  and  second  flights  of  the  east 
stairs.  Typically  treads  and  risers  are  cast-stone  with 
marble  base.  The  first  and  second  floor  front  stairs 
differ  with  marble  treads  and  risers.  Stairwell  walls 
are  plastic-stone,  while  the  ceilings  are  plaster. 
Railings  are  wall-mounted,  ornamental  bronze  with 
free-standing  center  railings  at  the  central  flights  of 
stair  nos.  1 and  2 from  the  basement  through  the 
third  floors.  Light  fixtures  are  ceiling-mounted  op- 
era-glass fixtures. 

Rear  Stairways 

Four  stairways  access  the  basement  through  the 
fourth  floor  at  the  rear  of  the  building.  These  stairs 


are  concrete  with  simple  metal  pipe  railings  (see 
figure  35).  Stairwell  walls  and  ceilings  are  plaster 
below  the  fourth  floor  and  exposed  concrete  above 
this  level.  Typically  all  original  light  fixtures  have 
been  removed,  replaced  by  non-contributing  surface 
mounted  incandescent  fixtures.  Non-contributing 
exposed  fire  sprinklers  have  also  been  added. 
Windows  consist  of  original  steel  sash  casements. 

Elevators 

The  two  elevator  types  are  passenger  elevators  and 
freight  elevators. 

Passenger  Elevators 

There  are  two  types  of  passenger  elevators  in  the 
front  house.  The  two  large  public  elevators  are 
located  at  the  east  ends  of  the  promenades  (see 
figures  36  and  37).  The  original  floor  is  covered  by 
new  dimple-textured  rubber  flooring.  The  walls 
and  ceilings  are  original  wood  panels  and  coffers 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


with  bronze  grilles  below  the  comice  trim.  Lighting 
consists  of  a single  sunburst  fixture. 

The  other  passenger  elevator  is  a smaller,  original 
automatic  elevator  found  in  the  south  front  entry 
vestibule  (see  figure  38) . This  elevator  services  the 
front  house  basement,  first  and  fourth  floors.  The 
cab  has  similar  finishes  to  the  public  elevator 
except  for  original  battleship  linoleum  flooring  and 
a smaller  sunburst  fixture  with  protective  metal 
cages  over  the  bulbs.  The  original  scissor  gate  is  a 
unique  and  noteworthy  feature. 

Freight  Elevators 

The  freight  elevators  are  found  in  the  rear  house. 
These  automatic  elevators  service  all  levels,  includ- 
ing the  fly  galleries.  The  cabs  are  contemporary 
replacements,  but  extant  paneled  doors  are  original. 


Figure  37  - Passenger  Elevator  Operator 


WORK  ROOMS 
Offices 

Public  Offices 

Public  offices  occur  at  the  front  house  and  consist 
of  both  private  and  open  office  plans.  Floors  are 
carpeted  presumably  over  linoleum,  marble,  or 
concrete  as  shown  on  the  original  plans.  Walls  are 
plaster  with  wood  base,  wood  chair  rail,  and  wood 
picture  rail.  Doors  and  windows  have  similar  wood 
trim.  Original  ceiling  finishes  have  been  covered 
with  glue-on  acoustical  tiles,  and  original  light 
fixtures  have  been  replaced  with  fluorescent 
fixtures.  Radiators  occur  within  exterior  walls 
covered  by  bronze  grilles.  Original,  built-in,  dou- 
ble-door wood  closets  still  exist  but  the  original 
lavatories  within  have  been  removed. 


Figure  38  - Private  Passenger  Elevator 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  Appendix 


CISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Contemporary  Offices 

Non-original  offices  have  been  constructed  within 
the  original  carpenter  shop  on  the  third  and  fourth 
floors.  They  have  carpeted  floors,  gypsum  board 
walls  with  vinyl  base,  and  suspended  acoustical  tile 
ceilings. 

Light  fixtures  are  fluorescent  and  a forced  air 
ventilating  system  provides  conditioned  air.  Doors 
are  generally  flush  metal  in  metal  frames.  Built-in 
cabinets  and  files  occur  throughout. 

Dressing  Rooms 

Three  dressing  room  types  occur  in  the  Opera 
House.  The  first  type  are  upper  level  dressing 
rooms  used  by  the  star  performers,  conductors,  and 
primary  cast  members.  The  second  type  are  base- 
ment dressing  rooms  used  by  the  secondary  cast 
members,  Chorus  and  Supers.  The  third  type  are 
musician’s  locker  rooms. 


Upper  Level  Dressing  Rooms 
Upper  level  dressing  rooms  are  located  along  the 
rear  house  corridors  at  the  upper  floors  (see  figure 
39).  Typically  the  most  distinguishing  attributes  of 
these  rooms  are  their  casement  windows  and 
private  restrooms.  The  floors  are  covered  with 
non-contributing  carpet,  the  walls  and  ceilings  are 
plaster,  though  many  of  the  ceilings  have  the 
addition  of  non-contributing  applied  acoustic  tiles. 
The  rooms  have  undergone  remodeling  over  the 
course  of  time.  Some  original,  free-standing  vani- 
ties have  been  replaced  with  contemporary  laminat- 
ed counters.  The  vanities  were  custom  designed 
and  are  found  in  the  original,  1932  construction 
drawings.  The  original  metal  wardrobes  remain. 
All  the  original  light  fixtures  have  been  replaced 
with  fluorescent  fixtures. 


Figure  39  - Upper  Level  Dressing  Room 


46 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Basement  Dressing  Rooms 

These  rooms  have  painted  concrete  floors  with 
simple  concrete  base  (see  figure  53).  Walls  are 
painted  plaster  and  ceilings  are  exposed  concrete 
slab  and  beams.  Original  vanities  consist  of  simple 
monel  counters  with  shelf  above.  These  vanities 
were  custom  designed  and  are  found  in  the 
original,  1932  construction  drawings.  Individual 
mirrors  are  located  above  the  counters  and  are  sur- 
rounded by  bare  bulb  porcelain  socket  light 
fixtures.  Simple  ceiling-  mounted  brass  light  fixtures 
with  globes  still  exist  in  several  dressing  rooms  but 
are  generally  supplemented  by  non-contributing 
fluorescent  fixtures.  Vanities  generally  occur  on 
three  sides  of  the  room  with  utility  sinks  along  the 
fourth.  This  fourth  wall  has  a pair  of  two-fixture  or 
three-fixture  porcelain  sinks  with  heavy,  goose-neck 
nickel-plated  fixtures  and  monel  framed  mirrors. 
Non-contributing  exposed  piping,  and  fire  sprinklers 
also  occur. 


Musician’s  Locker  Rooms 

Located  in  the  basement,  these  rooms  are  utilitari- 
an in  finish  (see  figure  40).  The  floors  and  base 
are  painted  concrete.  The  walls  are  finished  in  flat 
plaster.  The  ceilings  are  either  flat  plaster  or 
exposed  concrete  slab  and  beam.  Contributing 
components  include  the  original  benches  and  metal 
lockers  lining  the  walls. 

Lounges 

There  are  two  lounge  types:  smoking  lounges  or 
waiting  rooms,  and  performers’  lounges. 

Smoking  Lounges  / Waiting  Rooms 
The  first  type,  smoking  lounges  (male)  and  waiting 
rooms  (female)  are  anterooms  to  their  respective 
toilets  (see  figure  55  and  65).  The  floor  finishes 
are  either  quarry  tile  or  carpet.  The  walls  are 
paneled:  wood  paneled  at  the  bottom,  and  can- 
vassed plaster  fields  surrounded  with  wood  trim  at 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  Appendix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


the  upper  portion.  The  ceilings  are  typically 
finished  with  simple  flat  plaster  with  a run-in-place 
plaster  cornice.  Lighting  consists  of  ornate  wall 
sconces.  Ornate  bronze  ventilation  grilles  are  also 
significant. 

Performers’  Lounge 

The  performers’  lounge  is  found  in  the  former 
central  plenum  of  the  basement.  All  finishes  are 
non-contributing.  The  flooring  is  vinyl  tile  and 
base  cove.  The  walls  are  painted  gypsum  board 
(see  figure  56).  The  ceiling  has  suspended  acoustic 
tiles.  This  room  also  has  two  sub-spaces  housing 
the  music  library. 

UTILITY  SPACES 

Toilet  Rooms 

Original  toilet  rooms  throughout  the  building  are 
intact  and  consistent  in  finish  materials  (see  figure 
41).  Minor  variation  occurs  in  partition  marble  type 


and  toilet  fixtures.  Various  dressing  room  toilets 
contain  built-in  bath  tubs  or  showers  with  similar 
finishes.  Typically  floors  are  porcelain  tile  with 
small  white  rectangular  units  around  square  yellow 
units,  with  alternating  black,  white,  and  black  bor- 
ders. In  other  locations  the  floor  tiles  are  green 
and  yellow.  Walls  have  a beige  square  tile  wain- 
scot with  black  base  and  topped  by  black  bull-nose. 
Ceiling  and  walls  above  the  tile  wainscot  are 
plaster.  Toilet,  bath  tub,  and  shower  partitions  are 
generally  1-1/4"  thick  grey  marble  (with  black 
marble  fronts  at  the  front  house,  public  toilet 
rooms).  Stalls  contain  heavy  nickel-plated  brass 
partition  brackets,  door  hinges,  locks,  coat  hooks 
with  stained  oak  stall  doors.  Ceiling-mounted  brass 
light  fixtures  and  bronze  grilles  occur  at  the  ceilings 
(see  figure  41). 

Fixtures  are  original  wall-mounted  Standard  brand 
lavatories  and  urinals,  and  floor-mounted  Standard 


Figure  41  - Typical  Toilet  Room 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


brand,  “I nstanto,”  or  “Monaco”  model  toilets  with 
side  mounted  flushometer.  Mirrors  with  monel 
trim  occur  above  the  lavatories. 

Backstage  Areas 

Backstage  areas  consist  of  rooms  and  spaces,  other 
than  the  stage  proper,  functioning  as  support  for 
the  staged  productions.  These  include  property 
rooms,  switchboard  and  remote  control  rooms,  and 
fly  galleries. 

Property  Rooms 

Property  rooms  are  located  throughout  the  rear 
house  areas.  Typically  the  finishes  are  utilitarian: 
unfinished  concrete  floors,  plaster  walls,  and  con- 
crete ceilings. 

There  is  a property  room  located  in  the  second 
floor  north  "Organ  Loft."  The  finish  of  this  prop 


room  is  tongue-and-groove  wood  floor,  plaster  walls 
with  ornate  grilles  to  the  south,  and  plaster  ceilings. 
These  rooms  were  originally  intended  to  house 
organ  equipment  that  was  never  installed. 

Switchboards  and  Remote  Control  Rooms 
The  flooring  of  these  areas  consists  of  checkerboard 
mastic  rubber  tile.  The  walls  and  ceiling  are  either 
plaster  or  painted  concrete. 

Fly  Galleries 

Starting  at  the  third  floor  and  continuing  through 
the  upper  gridiron,  there  are  four  levels  of  fly 
galleries  flanking  each  side  of  the  stage  (see  figure 
42).  Floors  and  walls  are  unfinished  concrete.  All 
galleries  have  been  altered.  Some  of  the  original 
features  remain  including  pin  rails,  movable  railings 
near  the  lines  and  counterweights,  bridges  and 
catwalks,  and  trap  hatches. 


Figure  42  - Second  Fly  Gallery 


U 

T 

T 

fl 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Closets 

There  are  three  types  of  rooms  which  fall  under  the 
closet  room  type:  telephone,  janitor,  and  storage 
closets. 

Telephone  Closets 

The  telephone  closets  are  typically  located  adjacent 
to  promenades  near  the  main  stairs.  The  floors  are 
finished  with  tan  battleship  linoleum.  The  walls 
and  ceilings  are  flat  plaster  trimmed  with  wood 
baseboard,  chair,  and  picture  rail.  In  many  of  the 
closets  the  original  wood  telephone  shelf  is  intact, 
though  no  original  telephones  are  present.  Coat 
check  rooms  also  fit  this  room  type  description. 


slop  sink  with  new  plumbing. 

Storage  Closets 

Storage  closets  generally  occur  in  the  front  house. 
Floors  are  painted  concrete  with  simple  5”  high 
metal  base.  Walls  and  ceilings  are  plaster.  Lights 
are  bare  bulb  porcelain  sockets. 

Utility  Rooms 

Utility  areas  include  machine  rooms,  mechanical 
pits,  and  miscellaneous  storage  rooms.  Floors, 
walls,  and  ceilings  are  bare  or  painted  concrete. 
Miscellaneous  piping,  ducts,  and  exposed  sprinkler 
lines/heads  occur  throughout. 


Janitor  Closets 

The  janitor  closets  contain  utilitarian  finishes.  The 
floors  are  painted  concrete  with  concrete  base. 
The  walls  and  ceilings  are  typically  flat  plaster  with 
no  trim  or  ornament.  Typically  there  is  an  original 


Unimproved  Areas 

The  various  unimproved  areas  of  the  building 
include  plenum,  duct,  and  access  spaces  (see  figure 
43).  These  rooms  are  not  finished  and  contain 
either  exposed  concrete  structure,  hollow  clay  tile 


1'igurc  43  * Typical  Unimproved  Area 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 

walls,  or  exposed  plaster  and  lath.  Exposed  ductw 
ork  and  piping  predominate.  Some  areas  are  used 
as  store  rooms,  others  are  completely  inaccessible. 
Lighting  consists  of  bare  bulb  porcelain  sockets. 

SIGNIFICANT  COMPONENTS 

The  following  components  are  often  significant 
items  that  typically  occur  throughout  the  building. 
They  are  described  in  detail  in  this  section  and  are 
referred  to  in  the  Room  Type  and  Floor-by-Floor 
Analysis  sections  of  this  report.  See  the  Interior 
Recommendations  section  for  specific  material  type. 

■ Floor  Finishes 

■ Marble  Finishes 

■ Ornamental  Plaster 

■ Ceramic  Tile 

■ Wood  Trim 

■ Bronze  Elements 

■ Interior  Doors 

■ Hardware 

■ Light  Fixtures 

■ Plumbing  Fixtures 

Floor  Finishes 

In  addition  to  marble,  other  original  floor  finishes 
include  cast-stone,  quarry  tile,  mastic  rubber  tile, 
geometric  encaustic  tile,  wood,  battleship  linoleum, 
and  concrete.  Non-contributing  surfaces  include 
carpet,  resilient  tile,  vinyl  composition  tile  and 
sheet  vinyl,  and  raised  floors  in  computer  rooms. 

Cast'Stone 

Cast-stone  steps  can  be  found  in  all  the  upper  front 
house  promenade  stairs  starting  at  the  second  floor. 
This  cementitious  material  is  similar  to  terrazzo, 
with  marble  chips  embedded  in  a resin  binder. 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 

Tile 

Quarry  tile  is  found  primarily  in  the  basement  and 
upper  promenades  as  well  as  ancillary  formal  areas 
such  as  the  men’s  smoking  rooms.  The  umber- 
colored,  square  tiles,  set  in  a colored  grout,  are 
typically  bordered  with  black  marble. 

Mastic  Rubber  Tile 

Mastic  rubber  tile  is  found  in  the  upper-most 
promenades.  The  tile  is  typically  9"  x 9"  umber 
and  black  checkerboard  pattern  with  a solid  black 
border,  mimicking  the  black  marble  border  on  the 
lower,  more  formal  promenades.  Another  combina- 
tion of  rubber  tile,  green  and  white  checkerboard 
with  black  border  is  found  only  at  the  top  landing 
of  the  eastern  front  house  stairs  and  in  the  hospital. 


Geometric  Encaustic  Tile 

Geometric  encaustic  tile  is  found  in  all  bathrooms 
in  two  patterns.  The  first  is  a 4"  yellow  and  green 


Figure  44  - Geometric  Encaustic  Tile 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


checkerboard  with  a green  border  found  in  both 
the  men  and  women’s  toilet  rooms  adjacent  to  the 
basement  promenade.  The  second,  and  most 
common  style  is  found  in  all  other  toilet  rooms. 
This  basket-weave  pattern  is  a combination  of 
square  1"  x 1"  yellow  tile  surrounded  by  rectangular 
l"x  2"  white  tiles,  with  1"  x 2 " black  rectangular 
and  1"  x 1"  yellow  and  white  checkerboard  border 
(see  figure  44). 

Wood 

Original  parquet  wood  flooring  is  found  only  in  the 
basement  promenade  and  buffet  areas.  The  her- 
ring-bone-patterned flooring  which  was  recently 
refinished  is  bordered  with  black  marble  (see  figure 
27).  Wood  tongue-and-groove  flooring  is  found 
throughout  the  main  house  orchestra  and  stage. 

Linoleum 

Battleship  linoleum  is  found  throughout  the  Opera 
House  in  telephone 
rooms,  closets  and  waiting 
rooms.  Tan  is  the  typical 
color,  although  green  li- 
noleum can  be  found  in 
the  waiting  rooms  located 
on  the  west  end  of  the 
first  floor  promenades. 

Concrete  f 'Cement" 

Concrete  with  integral 
umber  color  is  found  in 
the  upper  seating  areas  of 
the  main  house.  The 
1932  drawings  indicate 
that  some  of  these  floors 
were  intended  to  be  cov- 
ered with  colored  wax  of 
which  there  is  no 
evidence.  On  the  original 


construction  drawings,  the  term  "cement"  is  often 
used  to  describe  what  is  actually  a fine  aggregate 
concrete. 

Concrete,  sealed  with  a clear  finish  is  found 
throughout  the  building,  primarily  in  the  rear  house 
areas:  non-public  corridors,  storage  and  locker 
rooms,  dressing  rooms,  fly  galleries  and  stage  docks, 
and  utility  spaces. 

Carpet 

In-laid  carpet  with  black  marble  border  is  found  in 
the  War  Memorial  board  room.  This  green  and 
grey  patterned  carpet  appears  to  be  a reproduction 
of  the  original. 

Marble  Finishes 

Marble  is  used  abundantly  in  public  spaces  as 
flooring,  base  trim,  door  thresholds  and  toilet  stall 
partitions. 

Flooring 

Marble  flooring  occurs  in 
the  foyer,  lobby,  prome- 
nades and  vestibules  on 
the  first  and  mezzanine 
floors,  consisting  of  mar- 
ble tile  field  and  border 
elements.  Depending  on 
location,  the  marble  floors 
can  be  found  in  a wide 
array  of  sizes  and  colors, 
j The  most  common  tile 
sizes  include  12"  x 24",  i 
16"  x 16",  and  14  1/2"  x j 
52".  The  most  common  ! 
colors  include  three  gra- 
dations of  rose:  light,  me- 
dium and  dark.  Dark  rose 
marble  is  found  only  in 


r 


Figure  45  - Patterned  Carpet  and  Drinking  Fountain 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 

the  end  of  promenades  to  the  north  and  south  of 
the  foyer.  Black  marble  trim  is  used  as  a border 
element  for  quarry  tile  and  in-laid  carpet. 

Base 

The  marble  used  for  bases  varies  between  light  and 
medium  rose.  It  is  used  on  all  promenades,  stairs 
and  adjacent  stairs  halls  in  the  front  house.  The 
heights  vary  from  12"  profiled  in  the  foyer,  to  11" 
in  the  promenades,  6"  in  the  stair  halls,  and  5 1/2" 
in  men’s  smoking  rooms. 

Thresholds 

The  marble  thresholds  consist  of  three  colors 
determined  by  adjacent  flooring  material  and  color. 
Rose  thresholds  are  located  adjacent  to  rose  mar- 
ble. Black  thresholds  are  found  adjacent  to  black 
marble  borders  or  black  rubber  tiles.  Grey-white 
marble  thresholds  are  found  almost  exclusively  in 
the  rear  house  areas  adjacent  to  concrete  flooring. 

Stall  Partitions 

All  original  stall  partitions  are  grey-white  marble 
with  nickel-plated  brass  hardware.  In  more  promi- 
nent toilet  rooms,  black  marble  is  used  for  stall 
partition  fronts  (see  figures  41  and  54). 

Ornamental  Plaster 

Ornamental  plaster  is  used  on  walls  and  ceilings 
throughout  the  Opera  House  in  accordance  with 
the  prominence  of  the  space:  from  "plastic-stone" 
in  the  promenades  and  elaborate  sculpted  ceilings 
in  the  foyer  and  main  house  to  flat  plaster  with 
simple  cornices  in  front  house  vestibules  and  corri- 
dors. The  ornamental  plaster  finishes  are  used  only 
in  the  front  house. 

Plastic-stone 

"Plastic-stone"  is  found  throughout  the  promenades 
and  front  house  stairways.  The  finish  technique  is 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 

intended  to  mimic  sedimentary  stone  blocks. 
Although  further  analysis  must  be  performed  to 
determine  this  material’s  specific  composition,  it 
appears  as  though  a finish  coat  containing  a mix- 
ture of  gypsum  and  crushed  stone  was  applied  in  a 
controlled  manner  to  achieve  the  consistent 
cracked  surface.  This  surface  appears  to  then  have 
been  coated  with  a translucent  coating  or  stain. 

Cast  and  Run-in-Place  Plaster 
Cast  and  run-in-place  plaster  ceiling  ornament  and 
cornices  are  found  in  nearly  all  public  areas 
throughout  the  front  house  and  become  more 
elaborate  with  the  prominence  of  the  space.  The 
most  significant  use  of  cast  plaster  occurs  in  the 
foyer  with  the  elaborate  coffered  ceiling  vault  and 
the  main  house  ceiling  with  its  elaborate  chande- 
lier. Run-in-place  plaster  cornices  occur  at  flat 
plaster  ceilings,  forming  soffits  at  the  more  signifi- 
cant areas. 

Ceramic  Tile 

Vitreous  tile  wainscot  is  found  in  every  toilet  room 
and  toilet  room  vestibule.  The  wainscoting  consists 
of  beige  and  black  ceramic  tiles  and  base  with  black 
banding  course  and  wainscot  cap.  There  is  a 4" 
black  tile  base  at  the  junction  with  the  tile  flooring. 
Where  repair  and  plumbing  upgrades  occurred 
newer,  square,  glossy,  black  replacement  tiles  have 
been  installed. 

In  dressing  room  baths  there  are  original  ceramic 
elements  in  the  wainscoting:  towel  bars,  soap  dish, 
tumbler  holder,  robe  hooks,  toilet  paper  holder,  and 
in  tubs  and  showers  a tile  reads,  "Please  place 
curtain  inside  the  tub  when  using  shower"  (see 
figure  66). 

Wood  Trim 

Profiled  wood  trim  is  used  at  various  areas  of  the 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


front  house  to  create  wall  panels  and,  in  the  more  used  on  the  walls  and  ceilings  of  the  front  house 
practical  use,  as  base,  chair  rail,  and  picture  rail.  passenger  elevators  cabs. 


Paneling 

Three  wood  panel  configurations  are  found  in  the 
more  significant  intimate  public  spaces.  These 
include  canvassed  plaster  field  with  wood  trim, 
painted  wood  panels  with  wood  trim,  and  stained 
wood  panels  and  wood  trim. 

The  first  configuration  is  the  most  common.  The 
wall  finish  of  the  box  vestibules,  smoking  room 
vestibules,  and  War  Memorial  board  room  have 
walls  consisting  of  painted  canvass  over  flat  plaster 
with  profiled  wood  trim  forming  rectangular  panels 
giving  the  illusion  of  solid,  raised  panels.  The 
second  configuration  is  used  at  the  mezzanine  box 
wall  and  consists  of  profiled  wood  trim  framing 
painted  wood  panels.  The  last  configuration  of 
profiled  wood  trim  framing  stained  wood  panels  is 


Profiled  Wood  Elements 

Profiled  wood  trim  in  the  form  of  baseboard,  chair 
and  picture  rail  are  found  in  original  offices  in  the 
front  and  rear  house.  Three  species  are  called  out 
on  the  1932  finish  schedules:  cedar,  Oregon  pine, 
and  birch.  The  typical  baseboard  is  6 1/2"  high 
with  profiled  cap  and  the  chair  rail  is  3 1/2"  wide  at 
35"  above  the  finished  floor.  Wood  handrails  with 
bronze  wall  brackets  can  be  found  in  the  front 
house  stairs  to  the  fourth  floor  offices  and  at  the 
inner  stairs  between  the  mezzanine  box  promenade 
and  orchestra-level  standing  room  space. 

Bronze  Elements 

Bronze  elements  are  found  throughout  the  front 
house  in  the  form  of  stair  railings  and  balustrades, 
grilles,  signage,  and  miscellaneous  components. 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Stair  Railings  and  Balustrades 
The  most  common  stair  railings  are  bronze  hand- 
rails resembling  bundles  of  reed,  mounted  on 
bronze  brackets,  and  terminating  with  a bronze 
volute.  These  can  be  found  in  promenades  and 
stairways  of  the  front  house.  Ornamental  balus- 
trades are  found  in  the  foyer  and  fourth  floor 
promenades.  The  level  of  detail  and  intricacy  vary 
from  the  heavy,  ornate  scrolled  balustrades  along 
the  west  side  of  the  foyer  to  simple,  unadorned  rails 
at  the  upper  levels  of  the  front  house. 

Ornamental  Grilles 

Ornamental  bronze  ventilation  covers  typically 
occur  in  the  promenades  and  the  War  Memorial 
board  room.  Less  elaborate  radiator  grilles  conceal 
recessed  radiators  at  the  front  house  offices. 


throughout  the  promenade  areas  of  the  front  house. 
This  signage  identifies  exits,  coat  rooms,  and  tele- 
phones, as  well  as  the  box  seat  designations. 

Miscellaneous  Components 

Other  significant  bronze  work  includes  the  ornate 
entry  gates  between  the  foyer  and  lobby  (see  figure 
59).  The  original  mail  chute  and  collection  box  by 
Cutler  Manufacturing  is  still  intact  in  the  front 
house,  originating  in  the  south  hall  of  the  fourth 
floor  office  suites  and  terminating  in  the  first  floor 
entry.  The  original  fire  hose  racks  and  hose  bibs 
are  unusually  elaborate  and  significant  (see  figure 
47).  Of  lesser  significance  are  the  original  4- 
pronged  coat  hooks  and  call  boxes  found  on  the 
walls  of  the  mezzanine  box  vestibules  (see  figure 
47).  Thermostat  covers  have  a bronze  finish. 


Signage  Interior  Doors 

Recessed  back-lit  bronze  signage  panels  occur  There  are  three  general  interior  door  types:  wood, 


Figure  47  - Box  Vestibule  Components 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Kalamein  Doors 
The  kalamein  doors  (met- 
al-clad,  solid-core)  are 
found  in  similar  configu- 
rations but  are  located  in 
fire-sensitive  areas:  stair- 
wells, storage  rooms,  etc. 
Many  have  faux  grained 
finish  giving  the  appear- 
ance of  their  oak  counter- 
parts, often  located  direct- 
ly adjacent. 

Fire  Doors 

Original  fire  doors,  such 
as  kalamein  sliding  and 
swinging,  and  overhead 
rolling,  can  be  found 


metal,  and  kalamein  (metal-clad,  solid-core).  Of 
these,  each  general  type  has  varied  configurations 
of  panels,  glazing,  and  details,  for  a total  of  more 
than  20  possible  door  configurations. 


Wood  Doors 

The  most  common  door  type  is  the  three-panel 
wood  door.  These  are  found  throughout  the  front 
house  areas  in  offices  and  rooms  adjacent  to  prom- 
enades. The  panels  are  solid  often  times  with 
metal  grilles  below  the  lower  panel  (see  figure  49). 


Metal  Doors 

The  second  most  common  door  type  is  a single- 
panel metal  door.  These  are  typically  found  in  the 
rear  house  areas  in  dressing  rooms  and  stage  and 
orchestra  support  areas.  These  doors  have  several 
combinations  often  with  grilles  below  the  lower 
panel.  Original  stenciled  signage  is  common, 
though  the  function  of  the  corresponding  room  has 
often  changed. 


Light  Fixtures 

Designed  and  manufactured  by  Boyd  Lighting 
Company  specifically  for  the  War  Memorial  com- 
plex, original  fixtures  exist  throughout  the  Opera 
House,  including  ceiling- mounted  and  suspended 
incandescent  fixtures  and  ornamental  incandescent 
wall  sconces,  torcheres,  and  chandeliers.  Ornate 
glass  globes  cover  the  fix- 
tures in  the  primary  pub- 
lic spaces.  Globes  with  a 
simpler  pattern  cover  the 
fixtures  in  corridors  and 
closets.  Utilitarian  spaces 
often  have  original  porce- 
lain utility  fixtures  with 
bare  bulbs. 


throughout  the  rear  house  areas.  Typically  these 
doors  have  intact  original  counterbalance  equip- 
ment (see  figure  57). 


Hardware 

Door  knobs,  escutcheons,  push  plates,  pulls,  butt 
hinges  and  window  hardware  are  typically  heavy 
solid  cast  bronze  with  a statuary  bronze  finish. 
Door  hardware  to  utility  spaces  such  as  janitor 
closets  and  toilet  rooms,  and  at  the  pneumatic 
vacuum  outlets  are  nickel-plated  brass.  Most  of 
the  original  hardware  is  in  good  condition. 


Plumbing  Fixtures 

Many  of  the  original 
heavy  porcelain  lavatories, 
urinals,  bath  tubs,  and 
Standard  "Instanto"  and 
" Monaco " toilets  exist 
throughout  the  toilet 
rooms.  Original  nickel- 
plated  fixtures  and  parti- 
tion hardware  are  extant. 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


FLOOR-BY -FLOOR  ANALYSIS 

The  following  Floor-by-Floor  Analysis  describes  the 
overall  historic  value,  condition  and  alterations  for 
each  room  throughout  the  building.  More  detailed 
identification  of  individual  component,  historic 
values,  and  conditions  can  be  found  in  the  Evalua- 
tion Matrices  section  included  in  the  Appendices. 
Identification  of  typical  finishes  and  components 
has  been  previously  discussed  in  the  Room  Types 
section  and  is  not  included  here. 

SUB-BASEMENT 
Utility  Rooms 

Rooms:  B2,  B3,  B4,  B5,  B6,  B7,  B8,  B9,  BIO,  Bll 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 


able  handrails.  These  handrails  no  longer  exist  at 
infill  Room  B6.  Room  B1 1,  originally  part  of  Room 
B3,  has  a furred  plaster  ceiling  and  is  partitioned  by 
a plaster  covered  brick  wall.  The  spiral  stairs  at 
Room  B7  and  remaining  original  stage  lift  at  Room 
B5  are  significant  components  (see  figure  49). 
Metal  man  doors,  fire  doors,  and  period  signage 
throughout  the  basement  and  sub-basement  are 
contributing  elements. 

BASEMENT 

Promenades 

Rooms:  13,  13  A,  13B,  14,  14 A 
Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Good 


These  rooms  are  all  generally  in  fair  to  good  condi- 
tion with  miscellaneous  cracked  concrete  floors  and 
walls.  Concrete  ceilings 
generally  contain  cracks 
and  spalls  with  exposed 
structural  steel.  All 
rooms  are  in  their  original 
configuration  with  the  ex- 
ception of  infill  Rooms  B6 
and  Bll. 

Room  B6  is  built  within 
the  original  bridge  pit 
(Room  B5)  and  has  non- 
contributing gypsum  board 
walls  and  wood  slat  ceil- 
ing (the  stage  floor 
above).  The  balance  of 
the  bridge  pit  and  Room 
B5  still  contain  the  origi- 
nal stage  raising  mecha- 
nism and  simple  remov- 


These  promenade  areas  are  intact  with  minor  ex- 
ceptions. The  west  wall  of  the  primary  promenade 
space,  Room  13,  and  all 
walls  of  the  buffet  area, 
Rooms  14  and  14A, 
change  to  rusticated  plas- 
ter from  the  plastic-stone 
in  the  balance  of  this  ar- 
ea. The  buffet  is  separat- 
ed  from  the  primary 
promenade  area  by  three 
large  openings.  The  buf- 
fet area  has  a significant, 
original,  U-shaped  bar 
with  slightly  radiused 
counter  between  each  col- 
umn. The  wood-paneled 
counter  has  a nickel-plat- 
ed floor  rail  and  marble 
base  and  a non-contribut- 
ing plastic  laminate  top. 
Behind  the  front  counter 


Figure  49  - Metal  Spiral  Stairs 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


are  original  built-in  cabinets  within  recessed  shal- 
low arches.  The  bar  has  original  cut  glass  ornate 
wall  sconces  along  the  rear  walls  (see  figure  51). 

All  promenade  areas  are  intact  and  in  good  condi- 
tion except  as  noted.  Minor  cracks  occur  along  all 
promenade  walls  with  severe  cracks  at  the  arched 
openings  into  the  buffet. 

Stair  Halls 

Rooms:  1,  2 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  stair  halls  serve  stairs  no.  5 and  no.  6 at  the 
east  end  of  the  front  house.  The  floors  are  quarry 
tile  with  marble  border  and  base.  Walls  and 
ceilings  are  plaster.  All  finishes  are  in  good  condi- 
tion. 

Passages 
Rooms:  21,  22 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Passages  21  and  22  are  located  to  the  west  of  the 
promenade,  connecting  the  front  house  with  the 
rear  house.  The  floor  ramps  up  to  the  west.  The 
walls  have  galvanized  metal  wainscot  with  smooth 
plaster  continuing  to  the  ceiling.  The  ceiling 
consists  of  a flat  plaster  finish. 

Rooms:  43A,  44A,  47,  53,  54,  56,  56A,  56B 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  passages  are  finished  similarly  to  typical  rear 
house  corridors  with  additional  metal  base  and 
comer  protection. 


Rooms:  27,  28 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 

Condition:  Good 

These  two  passages  are  finished  as  typical  basement 
corridors.  The  ceiling-mounted  light  fixtures  are 
incandescent  with  metal  shades  instead  of  brass 
fitters.  The  walls  exhibit  minor  chipping. 

Corridors 

Rooms:  37,  38,  63,  63A,  64,  64A 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 

These  corridors  are  generally  in  good  condition  but 
exhibit  cracked  floors  and  cracked  and  spalled 
ceilings,  sometimes  with  exposed  structural  steel. 
Significant  original  wall  sconces  remain  in  Rooms 
63  and  64.  Original  ceiling-mounted  fixtures  occur 
in  all  corridors  supplemented  by  non-contributing 
fluorescent  lights.  Corridors  37  and  38  contain 
significant,  original  brass  wall  sconces.  Original 
doors,  fire  doors,  and  drinking  fountains  are  also 
contributing. 

Vestibules 

Room:  5 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

This  men’s  toilet  room  vestibule  is  finished  with 
typical  toilet  room  finishes.  The  ceiling-mounted 
opera-glass  light  fixture  is  significant. 

Rooms:  69A,  70A 

Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 

Condition:  Good 

These  rear  house  vestibules  serve  the  freight 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


h ' -0 

CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


123  TOWNSEND  ST.,  STE.400 
SAN  FRANCISCO,  CA  94107 
t.  415-957-0100  f.415-957-1 199 


Od 

u p 


co 


W 

CO 

. . p 

< 


p-l 

p 

< 

co 


PL 

O 


HISTORIC  VALUE 


VERY  SIGNIFICANT 


CONTRIBUTING 


NON-CONTRIBUTING 


Sub-Basement 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


elevators.  They  contain  significant  ceiling-mounted 
sunburst  light  fixtures. 

Stairs 

Stairs:  1,  2 

Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Stair  nos.  1 and  2 are  the  primary  stairs  projecting 
to  the  north  and  south  of  the  promenades.  The 
treads,  risers,  and  landings  are  cast-stone  with  light 
rose  marble  base.  The  ceilings  are  plaster. 
Freestanding  and  wall-mounted  reeded  handrails 
are  bronze,  terminating  with  a volute.  All  finishes 
are  in  good  condition  with  the  exception  of  the 
walls.  The  rusticated  plastic-stone  walls  all  show 
severe  cracks  and  spalls. 


Stairs:  5,  6 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 

Stairs  nos.  5 and  6 are  located  in  the  east  comers 
of  the  front  house  at  the  entrance  vestibules.  The 
floors  are  cast-stone  treads,  risers,  and  landings 
with  light  rose  marble  base.  Metal  railings  and 
handrails  occur  throughout.  Walls  and  ceilings  are 
plaster.  Visible  damage  consists  of  plaster  cracks 
and  spalls.  The  balance  of  the  finishes  are  in  good 
condition. 

Stairs:  7,  8,  11,  12 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 


* 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Stair  nos.  7,  8,  11,  and  12  at  the  rear  house  are 
similar  in  both  finish  and  condition.  The  steps, 
landings,  and  base  are  painted  concrete.  The  walls, 
ceilings,  and  soffits  are  flat  plaster.  Railings  consist 
of  wall-mounted  metal  pipe-rail  assemblies.  Visible 
damage  typically  consists  of  spalled  and  cracked 
plaster. 

Offices 

Rooms:  6B,  9 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 


locker  room’s  finishes  and  components  have  been 
replaced. 

The  lockers  have  been  removed  from  Room  9. 
The  floors  are  carpet  over  concrete.  The  original 
plaster  walls  have  profiled  wood  chair  and  picture 
railing.  The  ceiling  is  finished  in  flat  plaster.  All 
original  lighting  fixtures  have  been  replaced  with 
non-contributing  fluorescent  fixtures. 

Room:  15 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 


These  two  offices,  former  women  and  men  ushers’ 
locker  rooms,  are  located  adjacent  to  the  prome- 
nade. The  original  room  6 has  been  modified  with 
a small,  private  office  to  the  west  (6B)  and  addi- 
tional women’s  toilet  rooms  to  the  east  (6).  The 
toilet  room  links  existing  toilet  rooms  6A  and  10 
into  one  large  suite.  Most  of  the  women  ushers’ 


The  hospital  is  located  adjacent  to  the  south  west 
comer  of  the  promenade  area  (see  figure  52).  The 
concrete  floors  are  covered  with  green  and  white 
checkerboard  mastic  rubber  tiles.  Profiled  wood 
baseboards,  chair  rail  and  cornice  moldings  adorn 
the  smooth  plaster  walls.  The  east  and  west  walls 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  /\ppenaix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


are  severely  cracked.  The  flat  plaster  ceiling  has 
been  patched  in  several  locations.  The  lighting 
consists  of  a ceiling-mounted  schoolhouse  fixture 
and  two  sconces  on  the  west  wall.  Period  furnish- 
ings, including  beds,  wheel  chair  and  gurney, 
contribute  to  the  overall  character. 

Dressing  Rooms 

Rooms:  30,  32 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 

Condition:  Good 

The  male  musicians’  and  female  musicians’  locker 
rooms  are  in  the  north  half  of  the  basement  off 
passage  28  (see  figure  40). 

The  male  musicians’  room,  oriented  along  the 
north  wall,  has  painted  concrete  floors.  The  walls 
are  plaster  over  concrete  and  hollow  clay  tile.  The 
ceiling  is  painted,  exposed-concrete  slab  and  beam. 


Non-contributing  fixtures  provide  light.  All  walls 
have  original,  built-in  lockers  and  bench  assemblies. 
The  wood  bench  tops  are  well  worn  and  chipped. 

The  female  musicians’  locker  floor  is  carpeted  and 
has  finished  plaster  walls.  The  ceiling  is  flat  plaster 
with  non-contributing  light  fixtures.  Significant 
elements  include  metal  lockers  on  a wood  bench 
along  the  south  wall.  The  vanity,  mirror,  and  light 
fixtures  along  the  east  wall  are  all  non-contributing. 
Unlike  the  male  musicians’  room,  this  locker  room 
is  also  equipped  with  a small,  private  toilet  room  to 
the  west. 

Rooms:  50,  52 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 

Condition:  Good 

Originally  dressing  rooms  for  the  guest  conductors, 
these  two  rooms  are  located  to  the  north  of  the 


Figure  54  - Women’s  Retiring  Room 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


orchestra  pit.  Currently  these  rooms  function  as 
wig  storage  and  a percussion  room.  The  floors  and 
bases  are  painted  concrete  below  flat  plaster  walls. 
The  ceiling  is  flat  plaster  with  non-contributing, 
ceiling-mounted  fluorescent  fixtures. 

Rooms:  61,62,  65,  66,  67,  68 
Historic  Value:  Contributing,  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Rooms  62,  66,  and  67  are  all  in  good  condition 
with  all  original  fixtures  and  finishes  intact  and  are 
considered  significant.  Room  61  is  presently  being 
used  for  costume  repair  and  its  fixtures  have  been 
modified  to  create  more  room.  Room  68  has  been 
modified  by  the  addition  of  an  elevator. 


Lounges 

Room:  1 1 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

The  women’s  retiring  room  is  located  adjacent  to 
the  promenade.  Patterned  carpet  covers  the  floor 
with  a light  rose  marble  base.  The  walls  are  plaster 
with  wood  panel  trim.  Centered  in  each  panel  is  a 
single,  two-armed  candelabra  sconce.  The  plaster 
ceiling  forms  a groin  vault  which  exhibits  cracks 
and  water  damage  (see  figure  54) . 

Room:  25 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 


Figure  55  - Performer's  Lounge 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  Appendix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


The  stage  crew  room,  located  to  the  south  of  pas- 
sage 27,  currently  functions  as  a lounge  for  the 
grips,  gaffers,  and  stage  hands.  The  floors  are 
covered  with  non-contributing  resilient  tile.  The 
walls  are  plaster  over  hollow  clay  tile  and  concrete 
with  a concrete  base.  The  ceiling  is  painted  con- 
crete slab  and  beams.  The  lighting  consists  of  non- 
contributing  fixtures.  The  original  multi-faucet 
sinks  on  the  south  wall  have  been  removed. 

Room:  45 

Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Built  in  the  east  half  of  an  original,  non-contribut- 
ing plenum  space,  the  new  performers’  lounge 
remains  a non-contributing  space  (see  figure  55). 
The  floor  is  vinyl  composition  tiles.  The  walls  are 
gypsum  wall  board  over  studs  and  hollow  clay  tile 
substructure.  The  ceiling  is  covered  with  applied 


Figure  56  - Men’s  Toilcl  Room 


acoustic  tiles.  The  lighting  is  comprised  of  surface- 
mounted  fluorescent  box  fixtures.  The  music  library 
is  built  in  the  northwest  portion  of  the  lounge. 

Toilet  Rooms 

Rooms:  6 A,  7,  9A,  10,  17,  23,  40,41,  60,  71 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Rooms  7 and  10  are  the  public  toilet  rooms  at  the 
front  house.  Room  9A  is  located  to  the  east  of  the 
former  men  ushers’  locker  room;  all  finishes  in  this 
toilet  room  are  intact  and  in  good  condition. 
Room  17  is  the  hospital  restroom.  Room  23  serves 
the  stage  crew.  Rooms  60  and  71  are  staff  toilet 
rooms  in  the  rear  of  the  house  and  are  intact.  Typi- 
cally, in  the  toilet  rooms,  beige  tiles  have  been  re- 
placed with  black  tiles  where  access  was  required 
for  plumbing  rehabilitation.  Handicap  stall  retrofit 
have  occurred  in  Rooms  7 and  10  where  two 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


original  stalls  have  been  combined,  fixtures  re- 
placed, and  stalls  enlarged  with  black  marble  stall 
partitions.  All  original  lavatories  have  been  re- 
placed in  Room  7 (see  figure  56). 

Room  23  has  water  damage  to  the  ceiling.  Rooms 
60  has  miscellaneous  cracked  plaster,  cracked 
marble  stall  partitions,  and  non-contributing  wood 
privacy  partition. 

Toilet  rooms  6A  and  71  are  finished  with  tile  floors 
and  wainscot.  The  walls  above  the  wainscot  are 
flat  plaster,  as  are  the  ceilings.  The  stalls  have 
original  grey  marble  partitions.  All  fixtures  are 
original.  Room  71  is  a somewhat  different  than  the 
other  toilet  room  because  it  has  an  exposed  con- 
crete ceiling  rather  than  a furred  plaster  ceiling. 


Rooms:  46,  48 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

These  typical  toilet  rooms  also  contain  bath  tubs. 
They  originally  served  as  private  toilet  rooms  for 
dressing  rooms  50  and  52.  Presently  they  are  used 
for  storage. 

Room:  6 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

This  room  was  originally  the  woman  ushers’  locker 
room.  The  space  has  been  divided  into  two  rooms: 
an  office  in  the  front  (6B),  and  a women’s  toilet 
(6).  All  finishes  in  the  new  toilet  room  are  non- 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


contributing,  with  the  exception  of  the  contributing 
plaster  ceiling  and  bronze  wall  grille. 

Closets 

Rooms:  1 A,  1C 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 

Condition:  Good 


This  room  is  an  intact  janitor’s  closet. 

Rooms  5A,  5B,  43B,  50A,  52 A,  7 IB 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  are  typical  storage  closets. 


These  storage  closets  were  once  telephone  rooms. 
The  battleship  linoleum  floors  are  in  fair  condition. 
The  walls  are  plaster  with  profiled  wood  base  and 
picture  rail.  The  ceiling  is  flat  plaster  with  original 
schoolhouse  light  fixtures.  Currently,  these  tele- 
phone rooms  are  being  utilized  by  food  services  for 
storage. 

Room:  3 

Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 


Utility  Rooms 

Rooms:  IB,  15 A,  72,  76,  77 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Rooms  IB  and  15A  are  essentially  one  continuous 
space  below  stair  no.  1,  finished  with  concrete 
floors,  concrete  and  hollow  clay  tile  walls,  and 
exposed  concrete  slab  and  beam  ceiling. 

Room  72,  currently  a wardrobe  room,  was  once  the 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Armory/clothing  storage.  Original  finishes  vary 
from  concrete,  hollow  clay  tile,  and  wood  grain 
contact  paper  to  paint.  The  original  wood  armory 
prop-cases  are  intact  but  have  been  modified  with 
sliding  glass  doors.  Lighting  consists  of  both  non- 
contributing fluorescent  and  original  incandescent 
fixtures. 

Drop  and  flat  storage  rooms  76  and  77  are  located 
in  the  far  west  end  of  the  rear  house.  All  finishes 
are  unpainted  concrete.  Noteworthy  elements 
include  original  metal  ship’s  ladders  and  lift  equip- 
ment. 

Room:  39 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 

Room  39  was  originally  intended  to  be  the  organ 
blower  room  for  the  organ  which  was  never  in- 
stalled. Significant  components  of  this  otherwise 
non-contributing  utilitarian  space  are  the  period 
signage  on  the  door  and  organ  blower  duct  (see 
figure  58). 

Rooms:  21  A,  28 A,  29,31,  35,  51 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Fair-Good 

These  utility  rooms  contain  varied  finishes  such  as 
plaster  ceilings  and  hollow  clay  tile  walls,  and 
concrete  floor. 

Rooms:  36,  44,  58 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  storage  rooms  have  a higher  level  of  finish 
with  plaster  walls  and  ceilings. 


Rooms:  2 A,  2B,  16 A 

Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 

Condition:  Good 

This  area  below  stair  no.  2 currently  serves  as  a 
kitchen.  All  original  finishes  have  been  covered  or 
removed  as  part  of  the  kitchen  remodel. 

Rooms:  24,  26 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 

Condition:  Good 

These  two  music  vaults  are  located  to  the  east  of 
the  male  musicians’  locker  room,  all  finishes  are 
painted  concrete.  The  floor  of  Room  26  also  has 
non-contributing  sheet  vinyl.  The  walls  of  the 
vaults  are  lined  with  metal  music  lockers.  The 
lighting  is  a combination  of  original  incandescent 
ceiling  fixtures  and  non-contributing  track  and 
fluorescent  fixtures.  The  original  vault  door  to 
Room  24  is  intact. 


Figure  59  - Glass  and  Bronze  Doors  at  Foyer 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  Appendix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 

Rooms:  4,  19,  20,  26A,  33,  34,  59,  69,  70,  73,  75 
Historic  Value:  Non -contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  are  typical  utility  rooms  with  unfinished 
floors,  walls,  and  ceilings. 

Rooms:  49,  49A 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 

Condition:  Good 

These  switchboard  rooms  contain  a higher  level  of 
finish  with  plaster  walls  and  ceilings. 

Rooms:  74 

Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

The  stage  area  at  the  basement  level  has  utility 
room  finishes.  Noteworthy  elements  include  rolling 
fire  doors,  movable  pipe  rail  sections  around  the 
stage  bridges,  two  spiral  metal  stairs,  and  miscella- 
neous suspended  motor  equipment.  The  floor 
mounted  monel  metal  make-up  tables,  mirrors  and 
shelves  are  original  and  significant  (see  figure  57). 

Rooms:  78 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Fair 

The  prompter’s  box  is  finished  in  painted  concrete. 
The  lighting  and  scissor  lift  are  non-contributing. 

Unimproved  Areas 

Rooms:  12,  1 9B,  60A,  71 A 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  rooms  are  unfinished  with  exposed  floors, 
walls,  ceilings,  pipe,  and  ductwork. 


July  9,  1993 

FIRST  FLOOR 
Lobby 

Room:  101 

Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

This  significant  space  is  intact,  as  previously  noted. 
All  finishes  and  components  are  in  good  condition 
except  cast-stone  mortar  joints  have  failed.  There 
is  also  water  damage  at  the  groin  vaults. 

Foyer 

Rooms:  102,  119,  120 
Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 

The  ends  of  the  foyer  rooms  119  and  120  vary  with 
flat  plaster  ceiling,  run-in-place  plaster  cornice, 
significant  wall-mounted  bronze  signage  and  bronze 
ventilation  grilles.  The  finishes  and  components 
are  in  good  condition  with  the  exception  of  the 
plastic-stone  and  cast-stone.  The  plastic-stone 
exhibits  spalls  and  cracks  throughout  which  have 
been  partially  "repaired"  with  duct  tape.  The  cast- 
stone  columns  are  in  fair  condition  and  represent 
a serious  priority  due  to  the  predominantly  failed 
mortar  joints.  The  pediment  jambs  at  the  west 
entrances  to  the  main  house  have  displaced  units 
also  representing  a serious  priority  (see  figure  59). 

Main  House 

Rooms:  103,  104,  105 
Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 

The  orchestra  level  seating,  Room  104,  is  the 
primary  area  of  the  main  house.  The  floors  are 
wood  tongue-and-groove  with  cast-stone  base  and 
columns  supporting  the  box  balcony.  The  ceiling 
below  the  box  balcony  has  ornamental  cast  plaster 


> CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,1 


July  9,  1993 

soffits.  The  main  house  ornamental  ceiling  experi- 
enced major  plaster  spall  failures  as  a result  of  the 
Loma  Prieta  earthquake.  Presently  a safety  net  has 
been  installed  to  catch  any  additional  potential 
falling  debris. 

Room  103  is  the  standing  area  at  the  rear  of  the 
main  house.  Floors  are  concrete  with  carpet  and 
marble  base.  Walls  are  plaster  with  wood  panel 
trim.  The  ceiling  is  flat  plaster  with  run-in-place 
plaster  cornice  and  ornamental  metal-and-glass 
covered  light  soffits.  Leather-covered  doors  occur 
at  all  entrances. 

The  orchestra  pit,  room  105,  is  intact  and  has  the 
original  movable,  sectioned  floor,  plaster  walls  and 
ornamental  square  coffers  below  the  stage  edge. 

Stage 

Rooms:  106,  107,  167,  168 
Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Room  106  is  the  stage  proper.  The  rear  portion  of 
the  stage  has  been  replaced  and  no  longer  moves; 
the  front  portion  of  the  stage  lifts  remain  intact. 
Room  107  is  the  rear  stage  with  flanking  scene 
docks  167  and  168. 

Promenades 

Rooms:  117,  118,  127,  128 
Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Rooms  127  and  128  are  the  primary  promenade 
spaces  with  rooms  117  and  118  as  ancillary  areas 
adjacent  to  the  foyer. 

The  inside  walls  of  both  promenades  adjoining  the 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 

main  house  at  one  time  accommodated  concession 
areas.  At  each  location,  the  western-most  pairs  of 
paneled  pocket  doors  are  blocked  and  covered  with 
large,  18th  century  tapestries. 

Stair  Halls 

Rooms:  113,  114 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Stair  halls  113  and  114  are  located  adjacent  to  the 
north  and  south  vestibules  which  flank  the  lobby. 
The  floor  is  light  rose  marble  tile.  The  walls  and 
ceilings  are  simple  plaster  finish  with  only  minor 
cracks  and  drill  holes.  The  only  trim  consists  of 
marble  base  and,  in  the  south  stair  hall,  the  original 
wall-mounted  mail  box  and  chute  assembly  manu- 
factured by  Cutler. 

Rooms:  127 A,  128  A 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 

Stair  halls  127A  and  128A  are  located  to  the  west, 
and  reflect  similar  finishes  of  their  respective 
promenades.  The  only  noticeable  damage  is  the 
minor  chipping  at  the  run-in-place  plaster  cornices. 

Vestibules 

Rooms:  109,  110 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Vestibules  109  and  110  are  located  in  the  front 
house  portion  to  the  north  and  south  of  the  lobby. 
Vestibule  110  has  blocked  doors  and  is  currently 
being  used  as  additional  office  space  for  the  Opera’s 
ticketing  operations.  In  this  room,  non-contribut- 
ing carpeting  covers  the  original  marble  floor. 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Rooms:  137,  138 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 

Vestibules  137  and  138  are  located  at  the  east  end 
of  the  rear  house  corridors.  The  floors  and  base 
are  painted  concrete.  The  walls  and  ceilings  are 
plaster  and  exhibit  severe  cracking  and  spalling. 
The  lighting  consists  of  non-contributing  wall 
sconces.  An  original  overhead  rolling  fire  door 
separates  each  vestibule  from  the  rear  house  corri- 
dor. 

Passages 

Rooms:  125,  126,  131,  132 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Passages  are  located  between  promenades  127  and 
128  and  the  main  house.  These  passages  are 
ramped  tunnels  with  carpet  runners,  plastic  stone 
walls  and  plaster  ceiling.  Finishes  are  in  good 
condition. 

Rooms:  135,  136 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Rooms  135  and  136  are  located  at  the  west  end  of 
each  promenade  and  serve  as  the  transition  area 
between  the  front  house  and  rear  house.  The 
floors  consist  of  original  green  battleship  linoleum 
with  light  rose  marble  border  and  base.  One 
portion  of  the  base  is  heavily  damaged  in  Room 
136.  The  walls  and  ceiling  are  simple  flat  plaster 
with  minor  cracks  and  chips.  Additional  contribut- 


ing trim  includes  profiled  wood  picture  railing  and 
the  original  ceiling-mounted  cut-glass  fixture. 

Corridors 

Rooms:  149,  150 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Corridors  149  and  150  are  located  in  the  rear 
house  flanking  the  stage.  All  finishes  are  in  good 
condition  with  the  exception  of  the  plaster  walls 
which  are  cracked  and  spalled. 

Stairs 

Stairs:  1,  2 

Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 

Stair  nos.  1 and  2 are  the  primary  stairs  projecting 
to  the  north  and  south  of  the  east  end  of  the 
promenades.  The  treads,  risers,  landings  and  base 
are  light  rose  marble.  The  ceilings  are  all  furred 
plaster.  Freestanding  and  wall-mounted  handrails 
are  reeded  bronze  with  volute  ends.  Finishes  are  in 
good  condition  with  one  exception.  The  rusticated 
plastic-stone  walls  all  show  severe  cracks  and  spalls. 

Stairs:  3,  4 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 

Stairs  nos.  3 and  4 at  the  west  end  of  the  prome- 
nades have  similar  finishes  and  damage  to  stair  nos. 
1 and  2,  except  for  cast-stone  treads,  risers,  land- 
ings and  base.  Wall-mounted  handrails  are  reeded 
bronze  with  volute  ends. 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 

Stairs:  5,  6 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 

Stair  nos.  5 and  6 are  located  in  the  east  comers  of 
the  front  house  at  the  entrance  vestibules.  The 
floors  are  cast-stone  treads,  risers,  and  landings 
with  light  rose  marble  base.  Metal  railings  and 
handrails  occur  throughout.  Walls  and  ceilings  are 
plaster.  Visible  damage  consists  of  plaster  cracks 
and  spalls.  The  balance  of  the  finishes  are  in  good 
condition. 

Stairs:  7,  8,  9,  10 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Fair 


Stair  nos.  7,  8,  9,  and  10  at  the  rear  house  are 
similar  in  both  finish  and  condition.  The  steps, 
landings  and  base  are  painted  concrete.  The  walls, 


Figure  60  - Opera  Ticket  Office 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 

ceilings,  and  soffits  are  flat  plaster.  Railings  consist 
of  wall-mounted  metal  pipe-rail  assemblies.  Visible 
damage  typically  are  spalled  and  cracked  plaster. 
The  balance  of  finishes  are  in  good  condition. 

Stairs:  13,  14,  15,  16,  17 
Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Stair  nos.  13,  14,  15,  16,  and  17  are  located  along 
the  west  side  of  the  foyer  at  the  entrances  to  the 
main  house.  The  treads  and  risers  are  marble  with 
an  inset  carpet  runner.  Ornamental,  open-scrolled 
brass  railings  flank  each  side  of  the  steps.  The 
border,  base,  and  buttresses  are  light  rose  marble. 

Stairs:  18,  19 

Historic  Value:  Significant 

Condition:  Good 

Stair  nos.  18  an  19  are  located  adjacent  to  the 
main  house  standing  space  providing  access  to  the 
mezzanine.  The  treads  are  concrete  with  a carpet 
runner.  Each  side  of  the  steps  are  light  rose  marble 
to  give  the  appearance  of  a full  marble  step.  The 
base  is  also  light  rose  marble.  The  walls  and  ceil- 
ings are  plaster  with  an  ornamental,  run-in-place 
plaster  comice.  The  inner  handrail  consists  of  a 
wrought-iron  baluster  with  a wood  cap.  The  outer 
railings  are  wood  with  metal  wall  brackets. 

Elevators 

Elevators:  1,2,3 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

All  three  front  house  elevator  cab  finishes  are  orig- 
inal. The  public  passenger  elevator  cabs  have  non- 
contributing, resilient  flooring  (see  figure  36,  37, 
and  38). 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Elevators:  4,  5,  6 

Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 

Condition:  Good 

Some  original  paneled  elevator  doors  exist  at  the 
rear  house  elevators  4 and  5.  When  original,  the 
elevator  doors  are  paneled.  The  original  elevator 
cabs  have  been  replaced  with  non-contributing 
simple  metal  cabs.  Elevator  6 is  adjacent  to  north 
rear  house  elevator.  This  elevator  services  1st  floor 
through  3rd  floor  offices  and  is  not  original. 

Offices 

Rooms:  111,  112 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

The  Ballet  ticket  office,  Room  111,  and  Opera 
ticket  office,  Room  112,  are  located  at  the  north 
and  south  ends  of  the  lobby.  The  Ballet  ticket  of- 
fice has  been  remodeled  with  new  counter-tops  and 
overhead  security  doors  over  the  grilles  (see  figure 
60). 

Room:  124 

Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Room  124  was  converted  from  a non-contributing 
utility  space  to  a non-contributing  office.  The  floor 
is  concrete  and  the  walls  and  ceiling  are  plaster. 

Rooms:  12 9,  130,  156,  158 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Rooms  129  and  130  are  located  adjacent  to  the 
promenades.  These  rooms,  former  concession  sales 
areas,  are  currently  used  as  a V.I.P.  room  and  the 
Opera  Guild’s  offices.  All  original  finishes  are 


intact  and  are  in  good  condition.  The  original 
paneled  wood  pocket  doors  are  still  intact,  though 
the  western-most  pairs  have  been  permanently 
blocked.  The  lighting  consists  of  non-contributing 
fluorescent  and  track  luminaires. 

Offices  156  and  158  are  located  in  the  rear  house 
adjacent  to  the  Memorial  Court  entry.  Radiators 
occur  below  the  windows.  Lighting  consists  of  non- 
contributing fluorescent  luminaires.  The  dividing 
wall  between  the  two  offices  is  not  original  and  is 
non-contributing.  Originally  Room  158  was  a 
waiting  room  adjacent  to  the  building  manager’s 
office. 

Dressing  Rooms 
Rooms:  145/147,  146/148,  155 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Upper  level  dressing  rooms  145/147  and  146/148 
are  located  adjacent  to  the  rear  house  corridors. 
These  originally  were  four  separate  rooms.  Rooms 
147  and  148  had  been  "quick  change  rooms",  and 
145  and  146  dressing  rooms.  The  parting  walls 
were  removed,  allowing  for  one  larger,  continuous 
dressing  room. 

Room  155,  remains  in  its  original  configuration. 
Toilet  Rooms 

Rooms:  115,  116,  151,  152,  157 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

These  toilet  rooms  are  the  public  restrooms  located 
in  the  front  house.  All  fixtures  are  original.  New 
black  ceramic  tiles  replace  original  beige  wainscot 
tiles  where  access  for  plumbing  replacement  oc- 
curred. 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Rooms:  141,  142,  155 A 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

These  toilet  rooms  contain  bathtubs  and  are  locat- 
ed in  the  rear  house  adjacent  to  dressing  rooms. 
All  fixtures  are  original.  New  black  ceramic  tiles 
replace  original  beige  wainscot  tiles  where  access 
was  required  for  plumbing  replacement. 

Rooms:  153,  154 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

These  toilet  rooms  contain  only  lavatories.  All 
fixtures  are  original.  New  black  ceramic  tiles 
replace  original  beige  wainscot  tiles  where  access 
was  required  for  plumbing  replacement. 

Backstage  Areas 

Rooms:  134,  134A,  139,  140,  159/161/163, 

160/162/164,  165,  165 A,  166 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Property  Room  134  and  passage  134A  are  located 
on  stage-left  (north  side  of  stage).  These  rooms 
remain  in  their  original  configuration. 

The  stage  switchboard  (Room  139)  is  located  stage- 
right  (south  side  of  stage).  The  floors  consist  of 
black  and  maroon  checkerboard  mastic  rubber  tile 
with  brass  trim.  The  walls  are  painted  concrete. 
The  ceiling  is  flat  plaster  which  has  been  patched 
in  several  locations.  Other  noteworthy  elements 
include  the  switchboards,  an  original  lavatory, 
original  wire  caging  around  the  switchboards,  and 
the  original  wall  mounted  fire  axe  for  cutting  the 
stage  fire  curtain  lines.  The  original  ceiling-mount- 
ed fixtures  have  manually  operated  dimmers. 


Room  140  is  a storage  room  stage-left.  Originally 
the  stage  director’s  office,  the  only  noteworthy 
finishes  remaining  are  the  checkerboard  mastic 
rubber  tiles. 

The  rear  house  entrance  areas  to  the  south,  Rooms 
159,  161,  163,  and  to  the  north,  Rooms  160,  162, 
164,  remain  in  their  original  configuration.  Finish- 
es are  utilitarian:  concrete  floors,  plaster  walls  and 
ceilings.  The  door  assemblies  at  both  entrances  are 
original.  The  original  guard  booths  at  both  entries 
are  intact  and  in  good  condition. 

Rooms:  165,  165 A,  166 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Rooms  165,  165 A and  166  are  all  former  property 
rooms.  Finishes  in  this  area  include  concrete  floors 
and  walls,  acoustic  tiles,  gypsum  board  walls,  hollow 
clay  tile  units,  vinyl  flooring  and  miscellaneous  pipe 
work. 

Closets 

Rooms:  117 A,  117B,  117D,  1 18  A,  118B,  118D, 

121,  122 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  telephone  closets,  converted  from  former 
private  telephone  rooms  and  check  rooms,  are  in 
good  condition.  One  exception  is  the  battleship 
linoleum  flooring  which  is  worn. 

Rooms:  115  A,  116 A,  143,  144 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  rooms  are  janitor’s  closets  in  their  original 
configuration. 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Rooms:  117C,  11 8C,  125 A,  BOA 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  storage  closets  contain  all  original  finishes 
and  are  in  good  condition. 

Unimproved  Areas 

Rooms:  123,  129B,  BOB 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Panel  Board  Room  123  is  located  below  stair  no. 
19.  The  floors  are  painted  concrete  with  base- 
board. The  walls  and  ceilings  have  a smooth 
plaster  finish.  There  is  a contributing  wood  cabine- 
try unit.  The  lighting  is  a non-contributing,  ceil- 
ing-mounted fluorescent  fixture. 

Duct  spaces  129B  and  130B  are  inaccessible. 


MEZZANINE 

Promenades 

Rooms:  M11,M12,M20,M21,M22 
Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Promenade  M20  connects  the  two  flanking  prome- 
nades providing  access  to  the  Opera  box  vestibules 
to  the  east  (see  figure  61).  The  finishes  are  unique 
to  this  floor.  The  floors  are  patterned  carpet.  The 
walls  are  canvassed  plaster  for  additional  acoustic 
deadening,  with  wood  panel  trim  and  light  rose 
marble  base.  Ceilings  are  flat  plaster.  Additional 
significant  components  include  ornamental  bronze 
wall  grilles,  multi-armed  sconce  fixtures,  and  marble 
wall  consoles. 

Rooms  M21  and  M22  are  the  primary  promenade 
spaces  with  rooms  Mil  and  M12  as  ancillary  areas 
overlooking  the  foyer.  Of  particular  note  are 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Figure  62  - Mezzanine  Promenade  Room  21M 


Figure  63  - Typical  Box  Seating 


Figure  64  - Call  Button  Panel 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  Appendix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


original  ornamental  bronze  grilles  and  sunburst 
ceiling  fixtures.  Room  M21  has  been  converted  to 
the  gift  shop,  delineated  by  new,  non-contributing 
metal  security  gates  and  containing  non-contribut- 
ing fluorescent  fixtures  (see  figure  62).  The  bar  in 
room  M22  is  not  original. 

Stair  Halls 

Rooms : M9,  M 10,  M79,  M 80 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Stair  halls  M9  and  M 10  are  located  in  the  east  side 
of  the  building,  providing  access  to  stairs  5 and  6 
to  the  first-floor  side  vestibules. 

Stair  halls  M79  and  M80  are  located  to  the  west 
of,  and  reflect  similar  finishes  of,  their  respective 
promenades. 


Passages 

Rooms:  Ml 5,  Ml 6,  M 73,  M 74 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Passages  M15  and  M16  are  located  between  prome- 
nades M21/M22  and  the  inner  promenade  M20. 
The  ceiling-mounted  fixtures  are  original. 

Passages  M73  and  M74  occur  between  the  side 
boxes  and  promenades  M21  and  M22.  The  finishes 
are  similar  to  those  in  the  connecting  promenade 
M20  with  the  absence  of  wood  panel  trim.  Faceted 
spherical  globe  fixtures  with  sunburst  fittings  pro- 
vide lighting. 

Corridors 

Rooms:  M 101,  M 102 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Corridors  M101  and  Ml 02  are  located  in  the  rear 
house  to  the  north  and  south  of  the  stage.  All 
original  finishes  are  in  good  condition  with  the 
exception  of  cracking  and  spalling  wall  plaster. 

Vestibules 

Rooms:  M 25,  M 41,  M69,  M70,  M7I,  M72,  M75, 
M 76,  M77,  M78,  M85,  M86 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

The  box  vestibules  serve  as  anterooms  between  the 
boxes  and  adjacent  promenade  and  passages. 


finishes  are  intact  and  are  in  good  condition. 

Rooms:  M 81,  M 82,  M 83 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Vestibules  M81,  M82,  and  M83  serve  as  transition 
spaces  between  the  passages/promenades  and  the 
forwardmost  box  seating.  Noteworthy  features 
include  the  original  call  box  mechanism  in  the 
Maid’s  Room  M83.  Still  operable,  this  panel  is 
connected  to  all  call  buttons  in  the  box  vestibules 
(see  figure  64). 


Room:  M 84 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Vestibule  M84  is  adjacent  to,  and  reflects  the 
finishes  of  the  men’s  smoking  room.  All  original 


Stairs 

Stairs:  1,  2 

Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 

Stair  nos.  1 and  2 are  the  primary  stairs  projecting 


Figure  66  - Men’s  Smoking  Room 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  /\ppenaix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


to  the  north  and  south  of  the  east  end  of  the 
promenades.  The  treads,  risers,  landings,  and  base 
are  light  rose  marble.  The  ceilings  are  all  furred 
plaster.  Freestanding  and  wall-mounted  handrails 
are  reeded  bronze  rails  terminating  with  volutes. 
The  rusticated  plastic-stone  finish  on  all  walls  has 
severe  cracks  and  spalls. 

Stairs:  3,  4 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 

Stair  nos.  3 and  4,  at  the  west  end  of  the  prome- 
nades have  similar  finishes  to  stair  nos.  1 and  2. 
Here  cast-stone  treads,  risers,  landings  and  base  are 
used  instead  of  marble.  Wall-mounted  handrails 
are  reeded  bronze  terminating  with  a volute  (see 
figure  65). 


PLEASE  PLACE 
CURTAIN  INSIDE 
THE  TUB 'WHEN 
USING  SHOWER 


Figure  67  - Shower  Signage 


Stairs:  5,  6 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 

Stair  nos.  5 and  6 are  located  in  the  east  comers  of 
the  front  house  at  the  entrance  vestibules.  The 
floors  are  cast-stone  treads,  risers,  and  landings 
with  light  rose  marble  base.  The  railings  are  metal 
with  a wood  cap.  Walls  and  ceilings  are  plaster. 
Visible  damage  at  the  walls  and  ceilings  consists  of 
plaster  spalls  and  cracks. 

Stairs:  7,  8,  9,  10 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Fair 

Stairs  nos.  7,  8,  9,  and  10  at  the  rear  house  are 
similar  in  both  finish  and  condition.  The  steps, 
landings,  and  base  are  painted  concrete.  The  walls, 
ceilings  and  soffits  are  flat  plaster.  Railings  consist 
of  wall-mounted  metal  pipe-rail  assemblies.  Visible 
damage  typically  consists  of  spalled  and  cracked 
plaster.  The  balance  of  the  original  finishes  are  in 
good  condition. 

Stairs:  20,  21 

Historic  Value:  Significant 

Condition:  Good 

Stair  nos.  20  and  21  are  located  between  the 
mezzanine  promenade  and  west  stair  halls.  The 
treads  and  risers  are  cast-stone.  The  base  is  light 
rose  marble. 

Offices 

Rooms:  M3,  M4 

Flistoric  Value:  Contributing 

Condition:  Good 

Offices  M3  and  M4  are  located  at  the  top  of  stairs 
nos.  5 and  6 respectively.  Noteworthy  elements 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


include  a dumbwaiter  and  vault.  These  two  ele- 
ments date  from  the  time  that  these  rooms  were 
used  as  accounting  offices  for  the  ticket  offices 
directly  below.  The  dumbwaiter  was  used  to 
securely  transfer  money. 

Dressing  Rooms 

Rooms:  M97,  M9 8,  M 103,  M 104,  M109,  Ml  10, 
Mill,  Ml  12 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Upper  level  dressing  rooms  M97  and  M98  are 
situated  at  the  east  end  of  the  rear  house  corridors. 
These  rooms  have  additional,  contemporary  closets 
finished  with  gypsum  board  walls,  enlarging  the 
wardrobe  area. 

Dressing  rooms  M103,  M104,  M109,  M110,  Mill 
and  Ml  12  are  located  along  the  rear  house  corri- 
dors away  from  the  stage.  These  rooms  are  in  their 
original  configuration. 

Lounges 

Rooms:  M89,  M90 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Smoking  room  M90  and  women’s  retiring  room 
M89  are  located  at  the  west  end  of  the  mezzanine 
passages.  The  walls  are  paneled,  canvassed  plaster 
with  run-in-place  plaster  cornice.  The  ceilings  are 
plaster.  Period  furnishings  contribute  to  the  overall 
character  (see  figure  66). 

Toilet  Rooms 

Rooms:  Ml,  M2,  M 87,  M 88,  Ml  13 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 


These  toilet  rooms  are  located  in  the  front  house. 
All  fixtures  are  original  and  in  good  condition. 
New  black  ceramic  tiles  replace  original  beige 
wainscot  tiles  where  access  for  plumbing  replace- 
ment occurred. 

Rooms:  M 93,  M9 4,  M105,  M 106,  M 107,  M 108, 
Ml  14 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

These  toilet  rooms  are  baths  and  lavatories  located 
in  the  rear  house  adjacent  to  dressing  rooms.  All 
fixtures  are  original.  New  black  ceramic  tiles 
replace  original  beige  wainscot  tiles  where  access 
was  required  for  plumbing  replacement. 

Closets 

Rooms:  Ml  IB,  Ml  1C,  M12B,  M12C,  M73B, 
M74B 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  telephone  rooms,  converted  from  former 
private  telephone  rooms  and  check  rooms  are  in 
good  condition.  One  exception  is  the  battleship 
linoleum  flooring  which  is  worn. 

Rooms:  M1A,M2A,M11A,M12A,M73A, 
M74A,  M95,  M96 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  rooms  are  janitor’s  closets  in  their  original 
configuration. 

Rooms:  M5,  M6,  M7,  M8,  M99,  Ml 00,  Ml  15, 
Ml  16 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Storage  closets  M5  and  M6  have  battleship  lino- 
leum floors  with  baseboard.  The  walls  and  ceilings 
are  plaster. 

Rooms  M7  and  M8  are  record  storage  vaults. 
These  rooms  are  finished  with  concrete  floors  and 
base,  and  plaster  skim  coat  over  concrete  walls  and 
ceilings. 

Rooms  M99,  Ml 00,  Ml  15  and  Ml  16  are  common 
storage  closets  and  have  similar  finishes  to  the 
vaults. 

Unimproved  Areas 

Rooms:  MJ3,  M 14,  M 23,  M 24,  M91,  M92 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Duct  spaces  M13,  M14,  M23,  and  M24  are  inacce- 
ssible. Ladder  spaces  M91  and  M92  have  concrete 
floors,  hollow  clay  tile  walls  and  concrete  ceilings. 

SECOND  FLOOR 
Main  House 

Room:  204 

Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

This  area  encompasses  the  dress  circle  seating. 
Stage-lighting  enclosures  are  integrated  with  the 
balcony  railing.  Non-contributing,  supplemental 
stage  lighting  is  attached  to  the  front  of  the  railing. 

Loggia 

Room:  201,  201  A,  201B 
Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

This  area  is  in  its  original  configuration. 


Promenades 

Rooms:  227,  228 

Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 

Condition:  Good 

Original  finishes  in  rooms  227  and  228  are  in  good 
condition  with  the  exception  of  plastic-stone 
cracking  and  spalls  at  promenade  227.  Noteworthy 
elements  include  large,  freestanding  bronze 
astarphaemeons  (the  tri-pedal,  ornamental  sculp- 
tural elements)  at  the  east  end  of  the  promenades. 
Non-contributing  stainless  steel  comer  guards  are 
found  at  the  elevator  openings. 

Stair  Halls 

Rooms:  231,  232 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 


Stair  halls  231  and  232  are  located  to  the  west  and 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


L 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


HISTORIC  VALUE 


— □ 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


reflect  similar  finishes  of  their  respective  prome- 
nades. All  original  finishes  are  in  good  condition 
with  the  exception  of  severely  cracked  plaster  at 
the  north  interior  wall. 

Passages 

Rooms:  202,  205,  206,  217,218,  225,  226 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 


Passages  217  and  218  are  located  at  the  ends  of 
passage  202.  The  finishes  are  consistent  with 
adjacent  promenades  227  and  228. 

The  remaining  passages,  205,  206,  225,  and  226  are 
located  between  the  promenades  and  main  house. 
These  finishes  reflect  the  adjacent  promenades  with 
additional  padded  carpet  runners  and  heavy  velvet 
curtains  (see  figure  68). 


Passage  202  is  the  central  cross  link  between  the 
two  promenades.  The  flooring  is  mastic  rubber  tile 
with  a maroon  field  and  black  accent  border.  The 
walls  are  rusticated  plastic-stone  with  profiled  wood 
base  and  picture  rail.  The  ceiling  is  a low  barrel- 
vault  finished  with  textured  sound-deadening 
plaster  to  reduce  noise  transference  to  the  main 
house  above.  Other  noteworthy  elements  include 
ornate  bronze  grilles  and  ceiling-mounted  opera - 
glass  fixtures  with  bronze  fittings  (see  figure  69). 


Corridors 

Rooms:  243,  244 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 

Corridors  243  and  244  are  located  in  the  rear 
house  to  the  north  and  south  of  the  stage.  All 
original  finishes  are  intact  and  are  in  good  condi- 
tion with  the  exception  of  cracked  and  spalled  wall 
plaster. 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  Appendix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Stairs 

Stairs:  1,  2 

Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 


Stair  nos.  3 and  4 at  the  west  end  of  the  prome- 
nades have  similar  finishes  and  damage  to  stairs 
nos.  1 and  2.  Wall  mounted  handrails  are  reeded 
bronze  rails  terminating  with  volutes. 


Stair  nos.  1 and  2 are  the  primary  stairs  projecting 
to  the  north  and  south  of  the  east  end  of  the 
promenades.  The  treads,  risers,  and  landings  are 
cast-stone.  The  base  is  light  rose  marble.  The 
ceilings  are  all  furred  plaster.  Freestanding  and 
wall  mounted  handrails  are  reeded  bronze  rails 
terminating  with  volutes.  All  original  finishes  are 
in  good  condition  with  the  exception  of  the  rusti- 
cated plastic-stone  walls  which  all  exhibit  severe 
cracks  and  spalls. 

Stairs:  3,  4 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 


Stairs:  7,  8,  9,  10 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 

Stairs  nos.  7,  8,  9,  and  10  at  the  rear  house  are 
similar  in  both  finish  and  condition.  The  steps, 
landings,  and  base  are  painted  concrete.  The  walls, 
ceilings  and  soffits  are  flat  plaster.  Railings  consist 
of  wall  mounted  metal  pipe-rail  assemblies.  Visible 
damage  typically  consists  of  spalled  and  cracked 
plaster.  The  balance  of  finishes  are  in  good 
condition. 


Figure  70  - Finished  Dressing  Room 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Dressing  Rooms 

Rooms:  235,  236,  245,  246,  251,  252,  253,  254 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Dressing  rooms  235  and  236  are  situated  at  the 
east  end  of  the  rear  house  corridors.  These  rooms 
have  additional,  contemporary  closets  finished  with 
gypsum  board  walls,  enlarging  the  wardrobe  area. 

Dressing  rooms  245,  246,  251,  252,  253,  and  254 
are  located  along  the  rear  house  corridors  away 
from  the  stage.  These  rooms  are  in  their  original 
configuration  (see  figure  70). 

Lounges 

Rooms:  215,  216 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Smoking  room  216  and  women’s  retiring  room  215 
are  located  adjacent  to  the  promenades  and  serve 
as  anterooms  to  the  toilet  rooms.  The  walls  are 
paneled,  canvassed  plaster  with  run-in-place  plaster 
cornice.  The  ceilings  are  plaster.  Period  furnish- 
ings contribute  to  the  overall  character. 

Toilet  Rooms 

Rooms:  213,  214 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

These  toilet  rooms  are  public  restrooms  located  in 
the  front  house.  All  fixtures  are  original.  New 
black  ceramic  tiles  replace  original  beige  wainscot 
tiles  where  access  for  plumbing  replacement  oc- 
curred. 


Rooms:  237,  238,  247,  248,  249,  250,  257,  258 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

These  toilet  rooms  are  located  in  the  rear  house 
adjacent  to  dressing  rooms.  All  fixtures  are  origi- 
nal. New  black  ceramic  tiles  replace  original  beige 
wainscot  tiles  where  access  was  required  for  plumb- 
ing replacement. 

Backstage  Areas 

Rooms:  233,  234 

Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 

Condition:  Fair  to  Good 

Rooms  233  and  234  are  located  between  the 
promenades  and  main  house.  These  rooms  were 
originally  designed  as  organ  lofts.  Though  the 
organ  was  never  installed,  the  plaster  grilles  along 
the  wall  adjacent  to  the  main  house  remain.  The 
floors  of  the  south  loft,  Room  233,  are  tongue-and- 
groove  wood  with  a non-profiled  wood  baseboard. 
The  floors  of  Room  234  are  concrete.  The  plaster 
walls  of  both  rooms  are  cracked.  Lighting  consists 
of  simple  ceiling-mounted,  incandescent  fixtures 
with  porcelain  fittings. 

Closets 

Rooms:  211,  211  A,  212,  212A 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Rooms  211 A and  212A,  originally  telephone 
closets,  are  now  used  as  storage  closets.  The 
battleship  linoleum  flooring  is  worn.  The  balance 
of  the  finishes  are  in  good  condition. 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  Appendix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUS 


July  9,  1993 


Rooms:  209,  210,  239 A 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  rooms  are  janitor’s  closets  and  are  in  their 
original  configuration. 

Rooms:  223,  224,  239,  240,  241,  242,  243 A,  255, 
256,  259 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  storage  closets  contain  all  original  finishes 
and  are  in  good  condition. 

Unimproved  Areas 

Rooms:  203,  207,  213A,  2 14 A,  221,  222,  229,  230, 
233A 

Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 


These  rooms  are  unfinished  duct  spaces,  plenums, 
plumbing  chases,  and  ladder  spaces. 

THIRD  FLOOR 
Main  House 

Room:  303,  304 

Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 

Condition:  Good 

This  area  encompasses  the  upper  portion  of  the 
dress  circle  seating  and  the  standing  area  behind. 
This  area  is  in  its  original  configuration. 

Promenades 

Rooms:  301,  309,  310,317,318 
Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 

Rooms  301,  309,  310,  317,  and  318  link  to  form 
one  continuous  horseshoe-shaped  promenade 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


wrapping  the  main  house.  All  finishes  are  in  good 
condition  with  a few  exceptions.  The  plastic-stone 
walls  and  run-in-place  plaster  cornice  contain 
minor  cracking  at  flat  areas,  with  severe  cracks  and 
spalls  adjacent  to  the  arched  window  openings. 
There  is  minor  damage  to  the  plaster  ceiling  as 
well.  At  the  north  end  of  promenade  301  a con- 
temporary, non-contributing  food  service  stand  is 
built  between  the  original  piers.  The  large  wood 
bar  in  the  center  of  this  promenade  is  not  shown 
on  the  original  plans,  but  appears  to  be  an  early 
addition.  Other  noteworthy  elements  include  a 
phone-cord  cover-plate  on  the  east  wall  of  Room 
301  and  additional  original  signage. 

Stair  Halls 

Rooms:  321,  322 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 

Stair  halls  321  and  322  are  located  to  the  west,  and 
reflect  similar  finishes  of  their  respective  prome- 
nades. All  original  finishes  are  in  good  condition 
with  the  exception  of  cracked  plaster  walls. 

Rooms:  329 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Fair 

Stair  hall  329  is  located  in  the  rear  house  at  the 
top  of  stair  no.  7.  The  floors  and  base  are  con- 
crete. The  walls  and  ceiling  are  flat  plaster. 
Noteworthy  elements  include  the  original  fire  hose 
rack  and  bib.  All  lighting  is  non-contributing 
fluorescent  fixtures. 

Passages 

Rooms:  311,312 

Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 

Condition:  Good 


Passages  311  and  312  are  located  at  the  ends  of 
promenade  301.  Both  passages  contain  finishes 
which  match  those  of  the  adjacent  promenade. 

Vestibules 

Room:  316 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Vestibule  316  provides  access  to  men’s  toilet  room 
314  and  has  matching  finishes.  The  lighting  con- 
sists of  an  original  ceiling-mounted  schoolhouse 
fixture. 

Stairs 

Stairs:  1,  2 

Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 

Stair  nos.  1 and  2 are  the  primary  stairs  projecting 
to  the  north  and  south  of  the  east  end  of  the 
promenades.  The  treads,  risers,  and  landings  are 
cast-stone.  The  base  is  light  rose  marble.  The 
ceilings  are  all  furred  plaster.  Freestanding  and 
wall-mounted  handrails  are  reeded  bronze  rails 
terminating  with  volutes.  All  finishes  are  intact 
and  are  in  good  condition  with  the  exception  of 
the  walls.  The  rusticated  plastic-stone  walls  all 
exhibit  severe  cracks  and  spalls. 

Stairs:  3,  4 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 

Stair  nos.  3 and  4 at  the  west  end  of  the  prome- 
nades have  similar  finishes  and  damage  to  stairs 
nos.  1 and  2.  Wall-mounted  handrails  are  reeded 
bronze  rails  terminating  with  volutes. 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  Appendix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Stairs:  7,  24 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 

Stair  nos.  7 and  24  are  similar  in  both  finish  and 
damage.  The  steps,  landings,  and  base  are  painted 
concrete.  The  walls,  ceilings,  and  soffits  are  flat 
plaster.  Pipe-rails  are  either  wall  or  floor-mounted. 
Visible  damage  to  walls  and  ceilings  consists  of 
spalled  and  cracked  plaster.  The  balance  of  the 
finishes  are  in  good  condition. 

Stairs:  25,  26 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Stair  nos.  25  and  26  are  located  at  the  east  end  of 
the  fly  galleries.  The  assembly  consists  of  a con- 
crete- filled  metal-pan  treads  with  pipe  railings. 

Stair:  33 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Stair  no.  33  is  in  projection  booth  room  404.  Steps 
and  base  are  concrete  with  simple  metal  pipe  rail. 

Offices 

Rooms:  325,  327,  332A,  332B,  332C,  332D,  332E, 
334,  334A,  334D,  334E,  334G,  334K 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  non-contributing  offices  are  all  located  in 
the  rear  house  with  the  original  carpenter  shop. 

Lounge 

Room:  3 15 A 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 


The  finishes  in  this  women’s  toilet  vestibule  differ 
from  those  in  the  typical  lounge.  This  room  was 
originally  one  large  retiring  room  with  an  adjacent 
original  toilet  room.  It  is  currently  divided  into  two 
rooms:  a non-contributing  toilet  room  and  a contr- 
ibuting entry  vestibule.  The  floor  is  carpet.  The 
walls  are  wallpaper  over  plaster.  The  ceilings  are 
plaster.  Trim  consists  of  original  light  rose  marble 
base  and  a ceiling  mounted  sunburst  lighting 
fixture. 

Room:  3 19 A 

Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

The  finishes  in  this  women’s  toilet  vestibule  differ 
from  those  in  the  typical  lounge.  This  room  was 
originally  one  large  retiring  room  with  an  adjacent 
original  toilet  room.  It  is  currently  divided  into  two 
rooms:  a non-contributing  toilet  room  and  an 
entry  vestibule.  The  floor  is  carpet.  The  walls  are 
wallpaper  over  plaster.  The  ceilings  are  plaster. 
Trim  consists  of  original  light  rose  marble  base  and 
a ceiling  mounted  sunburst  lighting  fixture. 

Toilet  Rooms 

Rooms:  313,  314 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

These  toilet  rooms  are  public  restrooms  located 
adjacent  to  promenades  317  and  318  in  the  front 
of  the  house.  All  fixtures  are  original.  New  black 
ceramic  tiles  replace  original  beige  wainscot  tiles 
where  access  was  required  for  plumbing  replace- 
ment. 

Rooms:  315,  319,  334B,  334F 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


With  the  exception  of  the  doors  adjacent  to  the 
promenades,  all  finishes  are  non-contributing. 

Backstage  Areas 

Rooms : 323,  323 A,  324,  324 A,  331,  332,  333,  335, 
338 

Historic  Value : Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Fly  galleries  331  and  332  flank  the  stage  to  the 
north  and  south  at  the  rear  house.  Gangway  338 
is  located  to  the  west.  All  original  finishes  are 
intact  and  are  in  good  condition. 

Room  333  is  located  to  the  south  of  the  fly  gallery. 
This  room  was  originally  a chorus  practice  room. 
The  floors  are  non-contributing  carpet.  The  walls 
are  plaster  with  wood  base,  chair,  and  picture 
railing.  Acoustic  tiles  cover  the  wall  plaster  from 
the  chair  rail  to  the  ceiling.  The  ceiling  is  also 
covered  with  non-contributing  acoustic  tiles. 
There  is  a small  balcony  (465)  at  the  east  end  of 
the  room.  A non-contributing  gypsum  board  and 
stud  wall  divides  the  original  area  into  two.  Light- 
ing consists  of  non-contributing  fluorescent  fixtures. 

Studio  335  was  not  accessible. 

Closets 

Rooms:  301  A,  301B,  317 A,  317B,  318A,  318B 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  telephone  rooms,  converted  from  former 
private  telephone  rooms  and  check  rooms  are 
intact.  The  battleship  linoleum  flooring  which  is 
worn. 


Rooms:  305A,  306A 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  rooms  are  janitor’s  closets.  They  are  in  their 
original  configuration. 

Rooms:  305,  306,  333A 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  storage  closets  contain  all  original  finishes 
and  are  in  good  condition. 

Unimproved  Areas 

Rooms:  302,  307,  308,  313A,  314 A,  320,  337 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  rooms  are  unfinished  duct  spaces,  plenum, 
plumbing  chases,  and  ladder  spaces. 

FOURTH  FLOOR 
Main  House 

Room:  406 

Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

This  area  encompasses  the  balcony  seating. 

War  Memorial  Board  Room 

Room:  401 

Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

The  War  Memorial  board  room  is  intact  and  in 
good  condition  with  some  minor  exceptions.  The 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


Recommendations  /\ppenaix 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


north  and  south  French  window  wood  reveals 
exhibit  water  damage.  The  period  furnishings 
contribute  to  the  overall  character. 

Promenades 

Rooms:  403,  445,  446 
Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Promenades  445  and  446  flank  the  north  and  south 
sides  of  the  main  house.  Room  403  is  an  arching 
cross-promenade.  Promenade  403  has  similar 
finishes  to  Rooms  445  and  446.  All  original  finishes 
remain  are  in  good  condition  with  several  excep- 
tions. A non-contributing  rusticated  plaster  wall 
with  mastic  coved  base  wall  repair  occurs  along  the 
east  wall.  The  mastic  rubber  tile  flooring  in  all 
promenades  is  in  fair  condition.  Many  tiles  are 
replacements  or  are  in  poor  condition  which  is 
especially  evident  at  areas  of  direct  solar  exposure. 
The  glazing  of  the  inner,  wood  casement  windows 
is  not  original.  Additional  significant  elements 
include  porcelain  drinking  fountains,  bronze  signag- 
e,  and  fire  hose  cabinets  with  brass  hose  bibs  (see 
figure  72). 

Stair  Halls 

Rooms:  407,411 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Stair  halls  407  and  411  provide  access  to  the  front- 
house  offices  from  the  passenger  elevators.  These 
rooms  are  separated  by  stair  no.  29.  Floors  are 
mastic  rubber  tile  with  marble  base.  Walls  and 
ceilings  are  plaster.  Picture  rail  and  door  trim  are 
wood.  Ceiling  vents  and  radiator  grilles  are  bronze. 


Rooms:  455,  456 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Fair 

Stair  halls  455  and  456  are  located  to  the  west,  and 
reflect  the  similar  finishes  of  their  respective  prome- 
nades. All  finishes  are  in  good  condition  with  the 
exception  of  severely  cracked  plaster  walls.  All 
finishes  are  in  good  condition  with  the  exception  of 
the  rubber  tile  flooring  which  is  worn.  There  are 
original  bronze  grilles  covering  the  recessed  radia- 
tor. The  lighting  is  a mix  of  original  schoolhouse 
fixtures  with  bronze  fittings,  as  well  as  non-contrib- 
uting fluorescent  fixtures. 

Passages 

Rooms:  437,  438,  439,  440,  441,  442 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 


Figure  72  - Plastic  Stone  Wall  with  Repair 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Passages  437,  438,  441,  and  442  are  located  adja- 
cent to  and  match  the  finishes  of  promenades  403, 
445,  and  446. 

Passages  439  and  440  are  tunnels  in  the  main 
house,  linking  passages  437  and  438  to  promenade 
403.  The  floors  and  base  are  terra-cotta  colored 
concrete  with  carpet  runner.  The  walls  and  ceiling 
are  plaster. 


door  heads  and  spalled  plaster  along  the  east  wall. 
The  ceiling  is  flat  plaster  with  run-in-place  plaster 
cornice.  Additional  significant  elements  include 
original  exit  signs,  fire  hose  rack  and  bib,  and  a 
drinking  fountain. 

Rooms:  463,  464 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 


Corridors 

Room:  402 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Corridor  402,  located  in  the  front  house  portion  of 
the  building  provides  circulation  between  offices  in 
the  adjacent  suites.  The  mastic  rubber  tile  floor 
and  base  is  worn.  The  plaster  walls  are  in  good 
condition  with  the  exception  of  cracked  plaster  at 


Corridors  463  and  464  are  located  in  the  rear 
house  to  the  north  and  south  of  the  stage.  All 
original  finishes  are  in  good  condition  with  the 
exception  . of  cracked  and  spalled  wall  plaster. 
Additional,  contributing  elements  include  original 
ceiling  mounted  schoolhouse  fixtures  with  bronze 
fittings. 


Figure  73  - Corridor  Room  402 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Room:  460A 

Historic  Value:  Non<ontributing 
Condition:  Good 

Corridor  460A  is  located  in  the  rear  of  the  house 
in  the  new  office  suite  built  in  the  former  carpenter 
shop. 

Stairs 

Stairs:  1,  2 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 

Stairs  nos.  1 and  2 are  the  primary  stairs  projecting 
to  the  north  and  south  of  the  east  end  of  the 
promenades.  The  treads,  risers,  and  landings  are 
cast-stone.  The  base  is  light  rose  marble.  The 
ceilings  are  all  furred  plaster.  Wall  mounted  hand- 
rails are  reeded  bronze  rails  terminating  with 
volutes.  All  finishes  are  in  good  condition  with 
the  exception  of  the  walls.  The  rusticated  plastic- 
stone  walls  all  show  severe  cracks  and  spalls. 

Stairs:  3,  4 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 

Stairs  nos.  3 and  4 access  the  mechanical  space  at 
the  fifth  floor  and  have  steps,  landings,  and  bases 
that  are  painted  concrete.  The  walls,  ceilings,  and 
soffits  are  flat  plaster.  Railings  consist  of  either 
wall-mounted  metal  railing  or  pipe-rail  assemblies. 
Visible  damage  typically  consists  of  spalled  and 
cracked  plaster.  The  balance  of  the  finishes  are  in 
good  condition. 

Stairs:  7,  24 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 


Stairs  nos.  7 and  24  are  similar  in  both  finish  and 
damage.  The  steps,  landings,  and  base  are  painted 
concrete.  The  walls,  ceilings,  and  soffits  are  flat 
plaster.  Railings  consist  of  wall-mounted  metal 
pipe-rail  assemblies.  Visible  damage  typically  con- 
sists of  spalled  and  cracked  plaster.  The  balance  of 
the  finishes  are  in  good  condition. 

Stairs:  25,  26 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Stairs  25  and  26  are  located  at  the  east  end  of  the 
fly  galleries.  The  assembly  consists  of  concrete- 
filled  metal-pan  treads  with  pipe  railings. 

Stairs:  29,  30,31,  32 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Stairs  29,  30,  31,  and  32  are  located  in  the  east 
end  of  the  front  house.  The  treads  and  risers  are 
cast-stone,  with  light  rose  marble  base.  All  stairs 
have  ornamental  bronze  railings  and  handrails. 

Offices 

Rooms:  412,  413,  414,  415,  416,  417,  418,  419, 
420 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  offices  are  all  located  in  the  eastern  end  of 
the  front  house.  These  originally  were  designed  to 
house  the  day-to-day  business  operations  of  the 
Opera,  Ballet  and  Symphony.  Rooms  417  and  418 
were  intended  to  be  anterooms  for  the  War  Memo- 
rial board  room.  Room  412  has  incorporated  an 
orignial  restroom  at  the  north  side. 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Rooms:  460,  460C,  460D,  460E,  460F,  460G 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  offices  are  all  located  in  the  rear  house. 
Originally  this  was  one  continuous  carpenter  shop. 

Dressing  Room 

Room:  45 9 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Upper  level  dressing  room  459  is  located  at  the  top 
of  stair  no.  7.  Most  of  the  original  finishes  are  no 
longer  intact.  The  floor  is  non-contributing  sheet 
vinyl.  The  walls  are  plaster  with  minor  cracks  at 
the  east  wall.  Trim  is  concrete  base  and  profiled 
picture  railing.  The  lighting  is  non-contributing 
fluorescent  fixtures.  There  is  an  original  radiator  at 
the  east  wall  in  addition  to  miscellaneous  piping, 
sprinklers,  and  ductwork  at  the  ceiling. 

Lounges 

Rooms:  447,  448 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

Smoking  room  448  and  women’s  retiring  room  447 
are  adjacent  to  the  promenades  and  serve  as 
anterooms  to  the  toilet  rooms.  The  walls  are 
paneled,  canvassed  plaster.  The  ceilings  are  furred 
plaster  finishes.  Period  furnishings  contribute  to 
the  overall  character. 

Room:  457 

Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

This  room  is  a non-original  lounge  built  in  what 
used  to  be  a plenum  space. 


Toilet  Rooms 

Rooms:  423,  424,  424A,  449,  450 
Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

These  toilet  rooms  are  public  restrooms  located  in 
the  front  of  the  house.  All  fixtures  are  original. 
New  black  ceramic  tiles  replace  original  beige 
wainscot  tiles  where  access  was  required  for  plumb- 
ing replacement  (see  figure  74). 

Rooms:  404A,  457 A,  460B 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  restrooms  are  not  original  and  contain 
contemporary  finishes. 

Room:  461 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

This  room  is  located  in  the  south  portion  of  the 
rear  of  the  house.  All  fixtures  are  original,  includ- 
ing a multiple  faucet  sink,  a shower,  and  a toilet. 

Backstage  Areas 

Rooms:  404,  465,  468,  469 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Projection  room  404  is  located  at  the  back  of  the 
main  house.  This  room  has  the  control  boards, 
spotlights,  and  other  electronic  monitoring  equip- 
ment. Fly  galleries  468  and  469  flank  the  stage  to 
the  north  and  south  at  the  rear  of  the  house. 
Balcony  465  is  located  within  Chorus  Room  333 
(Backstage  Areas).  For  a balance  of  the  finishes  in 
Room  465,  see  Backstage  Areas,  Chorus  Room  333. 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Closets 

Rooms:  466,  467 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  telephone  rooms,  converted  from  former 
private  telephone  rooms  and  check  rooms  are  in 
their  original  configuration.  The  battleship  lino- 
leum flooring  which  is  worn. 

Rooms:  451,  452 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  rooms  are  janitor’s  closets. 

Rooms:  421,  422,  425,  426,  427,  428,  429,  430 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 


These  storage  closets  are  in  their  original  configura- 
tion. 

Unimproved  Areas 

Rooms:  405,  407 A,  408B,  433,  434,  435,  436,  443, 
444,  445 A,  446A,  453,  454,  458 
Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  rooms  are  unfinished  duct  spaces,  plenums, 
plumbing  chases,  and  window  access  areas. 

FIFTH  FLOOR 

Main  House 

Room:  502 

Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 
Condition:  Good 


fSHIfi 


Figure  74  - Men  s 1 otiel  Room 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


WAR  MEMORIAL 
OPERA  HOUSE 


■ 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


This  area  is  the  balcony  cross  aisle.  All  elements 
are  in  good  condition  unless  otherwise  noted  in 
the  Evaluation  Matrices. 


Stairs:  3,  4,  7,  24 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 


Stairs 

Stairs:  1,  2 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 

Stairs  nos.  1 and  2 are  the  primary  stairs  projecting 
to  the  north  and  south  of  the  east  end  of  the 
promenades.  The  treads,  risers,  and  landings  are 
cast-stone.  The  base  is  light  rose  marble.  The 
ceilings  are  all  furred  plaster.  The  stair  has  wall- 
mounted,  reeded  bronze  rails  terminating  with 
volutes.  The  rusticated  plastic-stone  walls  all  have 
severe  cracks  and  spalls. 


Stairs  nos.  3,  4,  7 and  24  are  similar  in  both  finish 
and  damage.  The  steps,  landings,  and  base  are 
painted  concrete.  The  walls,  ceilings  and  soffits  are 
flat  plaster.  Railings  consist  of  wall  mounted  metal 
pipe-rail  assemblies.  Visible  damage  typically  con- 
sists of  spalled  and  cracked  plaster. 

Stairs:  25,  26 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Stairs  25  and  26  are  located  at  the  east  end  of  the 
fly  galleries.  The  assembly  consists  of  concrete- 
filled  metal-pan  treads  with  pipe  railings. 


Figure  75  - Property  Room  and  Carpenter  Shop 


INTERIOR  EVALUATION 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Offices 
Room:  517 

Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Room  517  is  a small  private  office  located  in  the 
electrical  shop.  The  floors  are  tongue-and-groove 
wood.  The  walls  are  flat  plaster.  The  ceiling  is 
painted  concrete  with  exposed  piping,  sprinklers, 
and  fluorescent  lighting  fixtures. 

Toilet  Rooms 

Room:  513 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Good 

This  small  toilet  is  located  in  the  electrical  shop. 
All  finishes  are  in  good  condition  except  the  tile 
floor  which  is  cracked  and  patched. 

Backstage  Areas 

Rooms:  511,  512,  512A,  515,  516,  518 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Rooms  512,  512A,  and  518  are  property  rooms  and 
a carpentry  shop  located  to  the  north  of  the  fly 
gallery.  Electrical  shop  511  is  located  to  the  south 
side  of  the  fly  gallery.  Fly  galleries  515  and  516 
flank  the  stage  to  the  north  and  south  at  the  rear 
of  the  house. 

Unimproved  Areas 

Rooms:  501,  503,  504,  505,  506,  507,  508,  509, 
510 

Historic  Value:  Non-contributing 
Condition:  Good 

These  rooms  are  unfinished  duct  spaces,  plenums, 
and  fan  rooms. 


BALCONY  AND  THIRD  FLY  GALLERIES 

Main  House 

Rooms:  601,  602 

Historic  Value:  Very  Significant 

Condition:  Good 

These  areas  encompass  the  upper-balcony  seating 
and  the  balcony  seating.  Additional  new  fans  have 
been  incorporated  into  the  original  light  fixtures. 

Stair  Halls 

Rooms:  607,  608 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 

Stair  halls  607  and  608  are  located  at  the  top  of 
stair  no.  1 and  stair  no.  2,  adjacent  to  the  balcony 
foyer.  The  floors  are  black  and  maroon  mastic 
rubber  tiles  in  a checkerboard  pattern  with  a solid 
black  border.  The  walls  are  a rusticated  plaster 
with  a light  rose  marble  base.  The  ceilings  are  flat 
plaster  with  run-in-place  plaster  cornice.  An 
original,  wall-mounted  porcelain  drinking  fountain 
occurs  in  each  stair  hall. 

Stairs 

Stairs:  1,  2 

Historic  Value:  Significant 
Condition:  Fair  to  Good 

Stairs  nos.  1 and  2 are  the  primary  stairs  projecting 
to  the  north  and  south  of  the  east  end  of  the 
promenades.  The  treads,  risers,  and  landings  are 
cast-stone.  The  base  is  light  rose  marble.  The 
ceilings  are  all  furred  plaster.  The  stairs  have 
reeded  bronze  rails  terminating  with  volutes.  The 
rusticated  plastic-stone  walls  all  have  severe  cracks 
and  spalls. 


CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


F—  CO.  ,NC. 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


condition,  except  for  battleship  linoleum  flooring  FOURTH  FLY  GALLERIES 


These  rooms,  the  elevator  penthouses,  are  located 
east  of  stair  halls  607  and  608.  The  floors  and  base 
are  red-painted  concrete.  The  walls  and  ceilings 
are  cement  plaster.  Ceiling-mounted  incandescent 
fixtures  provide  light.  Significant  components 
include  the  original  elevator  equipment. 


which  is  worn. 


Backstage  Areas 

Rooms:  701,  702 


Utility  Rooms 

Rooms:  603,  604 
Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 


Historic  Value:  Contributing 
Condition:  Good 


Fly  galleries  701  and  702  flank  the  stage  to  the 
north  and  south  at  the  rear  of  the  house. 


RECOMMENDATIONS 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


GENERAL  RECOMMENDATIONS 

APPROACH 

Carey  &.  Co.’s  philosophy  is  that  any  restoration  or 
rehabilitation  of  the  San  Francisco  Opera  House 
should  have  a minimal  impact  on  any  remaining 
historic  fabric  of  the  building.  Deficiencies  that 
threaten  life  and  safety,  or  are  causing  further 
deterioration,  must  be  corrected.  The  value  of  any 
other  improvements  should  be  weighed  against  the 
value  of  the  building  as  an  historic  resource. 

■ While  restoration  of  missing  or  damaged  compo- 
nents is  desirable,  it  may  not  be  economically 
feasible  at  this  time.  However,  further  removal 
of  historic  fabric  diminishes  the  value  of  the 
structure,  while  making  future  restoration  less 
feasible.  Therefore,  wherever  possible,  deterio- 
rated historically  significant  materials  should  be 
repaired,  extant  historic  fabric  should  be  re- 
tained, and  historically  significant  spaces  should 
be  rehabilitated. 

■ Distinguishing  and  character-defining  features, 
components,  and  materials  should  not  be  altered, 
removed,  or  destroyed. 

■ Wherever  economically  feasible,  damaged  or 
altered  materials  should  be  restored  to  their 
original  appearance. 

■ If  major  portions  of  remaining  historically  signifi- 
cant areas  require  a high  degree  of  alteration, 
consideration  should  be  given  to  restoring  these 
areas  either  now  or  in  the  future. 

■ Any  missing  features  that  are  restored  must  be 
done  accurately  and  with  adequate  historical 
resource. 

■ If  budget  constraints  do  not  permit  restoration  or 
rehabilitation  at  this  time,  materials  should  be 
stabilized  to  preserve  them  until  such  future  time 
when  they  may  be  restored. 


■ If  materials  must  be  replaced,  they  should  be  re- 
placed in  kind.  This  approach  preserves  the 
character  of  the  existing  structure  and  avoids  the 
intrusion  of  additional  materials,  which  can  result 
in  costly  maintenance. 

■ If  replacement-in-kind  is  impossible  or  inappro- 
priate, substitute  material  must  be  carefully 
selected,  considering  composition  and  visual 
compatibility. 

■ Building  standards  should  be  established  that 
incorporate  existing  components.  New  design 
should  be  compatible  with  the  remaining  original 
components. 

■ Any  proposed  cleaning  or  paint  removal  methods 
should  be  tested  prior  to  commencement  of 
work. 

■ Testing  should  be  nondestructive;  care  should  be 
taken  not  to  damage  the  building  or  create 
degenerative  conditions  during  testing. 

■ All  work  on  the  Opera  House  must  comply  with 
The  Secretary  of  the  Interior’s  Standards  for 
Rehabilitation. 

Prevailing  Code 

Recommendation:  Use  the  State  Historic  Building 
Code. 

As  with  any  historic  building,  especially  one  of  this 
importance,  the  State  Historic  Building  Code 
should  be  used  as  the  prevailing  code.  The  State 
Historic  Building  Code  allows  for  alternative 
approaches  to  satisfy  conditions  which  do  not 
conform  to  current  code  requirements.  This  allows 
for  sensitive,  performance-based  means  for  achiev- 
ing a safe,  improved  structure.  In  addition,  The 
Secretary  of  the  Interior’s  Standards  for  Rehabilita- 
tion should  be  used  as  a guideline  for  this  project. 


RECOMMENDATIONS 


97 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


EXTERIOR  RECOMMENDATIONS 

The  following  recommendations  identify  recom- 
mended repair  techniques.  Certain  material  defi- 
ciencies may  threaten  life  safety  or  lead  to  related 
building  component  failure,  and  are  therefore 
assigned  a maintenance  priority  rating. 

MATERIAL  REPAIRS 

The  exterior  of  the  San  Francisco  Opera  House 
still  retains  most  of  its  original  integrity  and  is 
intact.  The  building  exterior  has  been  well  main- 
tained and  is  in  good  condition.  Because  of  the 
limited  scope  of  this  report,  both  the  Exterior 
Evaluation  and  the  following  recommendations  are 
cursory.  Recommendations  are  also  limited  to  the 
original  1932  materials  and  do  not  address  materi- 
als used  in  the  1976  addition,  which  are  generally 
in  good  condition.  The  one  exception  is  the 
addition’s  pre-cast  concrete  cladding  which,  be- 
cause of  some  minor  deficiencies,  is  addressed  in 
these  recommendations.  The  impact  of  any  pro- 
posed exterior  alterations  required  by  the  overall 
building  improvements  must  be  carefully  analyzed 
and  weighed  against  the  integrity  of  the  historic  re- 
source. Due  to  the  building’s  high  degree  of 
integrity,  any  alterations  to  the  exterior  must  be 
minimal. 

General  Recommendations 

Recommendation:  Stabilize  and  repair  existing 
historically  significant  materials.  If  replacement  is 
required,  replace  missing  components  in  kind. 

Minimize  the  impact  of  visible  modifications  to  the 
exterior  facade.  Stabilize  and  repair  existing  origi- 
nal materials  in  kind  including: 


■ Terra  Cotta 

■ Granite 

■ Steel  Windows 

■ Bronze  Elements 

■ Cast  Iron  Elements 

■ Galvanized  Metal  Elements 

■ Cast  Stone 

Terra  Cotta 

Spalled  Terra  Cotta 
Priority:  Serious 

Recommendation:  Repair  spalled  terra-cotta  units,  pin 
if  structural  attachment  is  required. 

In  addition  to  the  unsightly  appearance,  spalls 
create  poor  conditions  where  water  can  penetrate 
the  terra-cotta  bisque  leading  to  further  unit 
spalling.  Water  penetration  can  also  potentially 
cause  serious  damage  to  metal  reinforcement 
holding  the  terra-cotta  cladding  in  place.  Spalls  on 
horizontal  surfaces  such  as  window  sills  and  lintels 
are  particularly  susceptible  to  water  damage. 
Repair  spalls  as  follows: 

1.  Remove  all  loose  terra-cotta  material.  Tap  all 
edges  around  spalled  area  and  remove  hollow, 
unsound,  or  cracked  material. 

2.  Verify  with  preservation  architect  whether  the 
severity  of  the  damage  may  warrant  replace- 
ment of  the  entire  unit. 

3.  Clean  all  surfaces  to  be  patched.  Protect  and 
do  not  damage  all  adjacent  material  which  is 
to  remain. 

4.  Verify  with  structural  engineer  where  pins  are 
required. 


98  ■ CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


5.  Wet  surface  before  forcing  patching  compound 
into  spall  area.  Match  surface  profile. 

6.  Coat  repair  with  flexible  coating  to  match 
original  glaze. 

Cracked  Terra  Cotta 
Priority:  Critical 

Recommendation:  Repair  cracked  terra-cotta  units,  pin 
if  structural  attachment  is  required. 

Cracks  can  allow  water  to  penetrate  beneath  the 
protective  terra-cotta  glaze.  This  water  may  lead  to 
spalling  and  other  terra-cotta  failure.  Previously 
repaired  cracks  should  be  examined  closely  for  any 
deterioration.  Remove  loose  or  deteriorated  patch- 
ing material.  Repair  cracks  as  follows: 

1.  Remove  old  caulking  or  grout  from  previously 
repaired  cracks.  Remove  all  loose  particles 
back  to  sound  material. 

2.  Clean  and  prepare  surface  to  accept  patch 
material. 

3.  Mask  and  protect  adjacent  surfaces. 

4.  Verify  with  structural  engineer  if  pins  are 
required. 

5.  For  Narrow  Crack  Repair  (cracks  from  hairline 
to  1/16"  wide): 

a.  Force  patching  material  into  crack  follow- 
ing manufac turer’s  application  ins tructions . 

6.  For  Wide  Crack  Repair  (cracks  wider  than 
1/16"): 

a.  Thoroughly  wet  existing  masonry. 

b.  Force  patching  material  into  crack  follow- 
ing manu  fac  tu  rer’s  app  lie  a tion  ins  true  t ions . 

7.  Finish  flush  with  adjacent  surface/texture. 

8.  Coat  repair  with  flexible  coating  to  match 
original  glaze. 


Debonded  Terra-Cotta  Glaze 
Priority:  Minor 

Recommendation:  Coat  areas  of  debonded  glaze. 

Debonded  glaze  exposes  terra-cotta  bisque  allowing 
water  to  penetrate  inside  the  unit  resulting  in 
further  deterioration.  Areas  of  debonded  glaze  also 
provide  a climate  suitable  for  biological  growth 
which  is  harmful  to  the  terra  cotta.  Repair  de- 
bonded glaze  as  follows: 

1.  Remove  all  loose  glaze  by  hand.  Tap  all  edges 
around  spalled  area  and  remove  hollow,  un- 
sound, or  cracked  material. 

2.  Clean  surface  to  remove  soiling  and  disinfect 
to  remove  biological  growth.  Protect  and  do 
not  damage  all  adjacent  glazed  areas  and 
mortar  joints  which  will  remain. 

3.  Coat  all  cleaned,  disinfected  surfaces  with 
flexible  coating  to  match  existing  glaze. 

Replacement  of  Terra  Cotta 
Priority:  Critical 

Recommendation:  Replace  unsound  and  severely 

cracked  terra-cotta  units  in  kind. 

No  units  have  been  identified  which  are  beyond 
repair.  However,  further  evaluation  may  locate 
unsound  or  severely  damaged  units.  Replace  terra- 
cotta units  that  cannot  be  repaired  as  follows: 

1.  Choose  an  acceptable  manufacturer  and 
installer  experienced  in  terra-cotta  replace- 
ment. 

2.  Fabricate  terra-cotta  units  to: 

a.  Match  original  ornamental  pattern  and 
configuration  and  glaze. 


RECOMMENDATIONS  -99 


xiouaddw 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


b.  Maintain  the  same  face  shell  thickness 
and  structural  and  physical  properties 
equal  to  the  existing  installation. 

c.  Provide  non-ferrous  metal  anchors  and 
fastening. 

d.  Match  color  and  texture  of  original  units. 

3.  Remove  complete  deteriorated  terra-cotta  unit. 
Protect  and  do  not  damage  units  that  are  to 
remain. 

4.  Clean  out  back  wall;  remove  loose  debris  and 
clean  substrate. 

5.  Clean  and  prime  existing  ferrous  and  embed- 
ded metals  with  zinc  rich  paint. 

6.  Verify  method  of  new  unit  attachment  with 
structural  engineer. 

7.  Install  flush  with  adjacent  units. 

8.  Point  mortar  joints  as  indicated  under  Re- 
pointing. 

Soiled  Terra  Cotta 
Priority:  Minor 

Recommendation:  Clean  all  soiled  terra-cotta 

surfaces. 

Soiling  is  not  necessarily  detrimental  to  terra  cotta 
surfaces,  however  the  overall  appearance  is  dull 
and,  over  time,  may  become  more  unsightly.  Clean 
repaired  terra-cotta  surfaces  as  follows: 

1.  Test  cleaning  products  and  procedures  to 
determine  gentlest  method  of  cleaning. 

2.  Clean  all  terra-cotta  surfaces  using  methods 
established  in  testing. 

Granite 
Soiled  Granite 
Priority:  Minor 

Recommendation:  Clean  all  granite  surfaces 


Much  of  the  granite  occurs  at  the  base  of  the 
building  and  on  the  entry  steps.  Due  to  its  close 
proximity  to  the  ground  and  exposure  to  pedestrian 
traffic,  the  granite  is  lightly  soiled.  Soiling  is  not 
detrimental  to  granite  surfaces;  however  the  overall 
appearance  is  dull  and,  over  time,  may  become 
more  unsightly.  Clean  granite  as  follows: 

1.  Test  cleaning  products  and  procedures  to 
determine  gentlest  method  of  cleaning. 

2.  Clean  all  granite  surfaces  using  methods 
established  in  testing. 

Bronze  and  Copper  Elements 

Doors,  Window  Surrounds,  Light  Fixtures,  Copper 

Marquee 

Priority:  Minor 

Recommendation:  Restore  existing  bronze  and 
copper  elements. 

When  exposed  to  weather,  copper  and  bronze 
elements  form  a surface  patina  that  serves  to 
protect  the  material  from  deterioration.  However, 
build-up  of  soiling  or  pooling  of  water  will  aggra- 
vate the  protective  coating  and  may  allow  harmful 
layers  of  corrosion  to  occur.  Bronze  requires 
periodic  minor  maintenance  to  maintain  its  protec- 
tive surface  patina  and  to  prevent  more  serious 
deterioration.  Rehabilitate  bronze  and  copper 
elements  as  follows: 

1.  Survey  existing  condition  of  all  bronze  doors, 
window  surrounds,  and  marquee. 

2.  Replace  missing  components  to  match  original. 
Reattach  displaced  elements. 

3.  Clean  all  existing  door  hardware.  Install  new 
hardware  to  match  original  where  missing. 


100  ■ CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


4.  Assure  that  doors  function  properly.  Rehang 
if  necessary. 

5.  Clean  and  remove  corrosion  from  all  bronze 
surfaces. 

6.  Replace  all  missing  or  deteriorated  copper  on 
marquee.  Reattach  loose  sections.  Repair 
open  seams. 

Steel  Windows 

Priority:  Minor 

Recommendation:  Rehabilitate  existing  windows. 

Replace  missing  or  broken  glazing. 

The  steel  sash  windows  exhibit  minor  deterioration. 
This  finish  deterioration  and  minor  corrosion  do 
not  represent  serious  deficiencies.  However  failure 
to  remedy  and  maintain  ferrous  metal  can  lead  to 
more  invasive  required  repairs  or  component 
replacement.  Repair  windows  as  follows: 

1.  Survey  existing  condition  of  all  steel  sash  win- 
dow components. 

2.  Remove  dirt  and  deteriorated  glazing  putty. 

3.  Install  new  glazing  putty. 

4.  Clean  existing  hardware.  Install  new  hardware 
where  missing  to  match  original. 

5.  Install  new  glazing  where  cracked  or  broken 
to  match  existing  original  glazing. 

Cast-Iron  Elements 

Window  Surrounds,  Ornamental  Fence 
Priority:  Minor 

Recommendation:  Maintain  existing  cast-iron 

elements. 

The  cast-iron  elements  have  few  surface  deficien- 
cies and  have  been  painted  periodically  preventing 
surface  corrosion.  Continued  maintenance  in  the 
form  of  painting  is  critical  to  keep  the  ferrous  metal 
in  good  condition.  Build-up  of  paint  on  the  orna- 


mental gates  softens  the  detail.  All  paint  should  be 
removed  and  the  surfaces  primed  at  the  time  of  the 
next  gate  restoration.  Maintain  cast-iron  elements 
as  follows: 

1.  Survey  existing  condition  of  all  cast-iron 
elements. 

2.  Remove  flaking  paint  and  corrosion  with  wire 
brush. 

3.  Prime  and  paint  with  rust-inhibitive  paint. 

Galvanized  Metal  Elements 

Window  Panels,  Awnings 
Priority:  Minor 

Recommendation:  Maintain  existing  galvanized 

metal  elements. 

The  galvanized  surface  serves  to  protect  the  sheet 
metal  from  corrosion.  This  layer  of  galvanization  is 
generally  quite  thin  and  flakes  off  easily  if  abraded. 
Galvanized  surfaces  need  to  be  maintained  to 
prevent  deterioration  in  the  form  of  corrosion. 
Restore  deteriorated  galvanized  metal  elements  as 
follows. 

1 . Remove  flaking  paint  and  corrosion. 

2.  Prime  and  paint  with  rust-inhibitive  paint 
formulated  for  galvanized  surfaces. 

Precast  Concrete  Panels 
Priority:  Minor 

Recommendation:  Clean  areas  of  heavy  soiling  and 
staining. 

Due  to  the  relatively  recent  date  of  construction, 
the  precast  concrete  panels  on  the  addition  are  in 
good  condition.  Deficiencies  are  limited  to  surface 
soiling  and  staining,  especially  on  the  cornice  and 
beneath  the  bronze  fixtures.  Clean  designated 
areas  on  the  precast  concrete  as  follows. 


RECOMMENDATIONS 


101 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


1.  Test  cleaning  products  and  procedures  to 
determine  gentlest  method  of  cleaning  and 
stain  removal. 

2.  Clean  and  remove  stains  from  designated  cast- 
stone  surfaces  using  methods  established  in 
testing. 

Repointing 

Priority:  Minor 

Recommendation:  Repoint  deteriorated,  loose,  and 

missing  mortar. 

Deteriorated  joints  should  all  be  repaired  to  avoid 


further  water  infiltration,  particularly  if  they  occur 
near  window  sills  and  other  horizontal  surfaces. 
The  condition  of  the  mortar  joints  on  the  entire 
building  should  be  surveyed  and  proper  repairs 
made.  Recommended  repointing  sequence  is  as 
follows: 

1.  Analyze  mortar  to  establish  original  composi- 
tion. Specify  repair  mortar  to  match  original. 

2.  Rake  out  all  loose  or  deteriorated  mortar. 

3.  Repoint  with  new  mortar  to  match  original 
color,  texture,  and  profile. 


102  ■ CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


INTERIOR  RECOMMENDATIONS 

The  following  analysis  identifies  recommended  treat- 
ment for  preservation  of  room  types,  primary  build- 
ing components,  and  interior  materials.  Recom- 
mendations for  preservation  of  each  floor  follow. 

PRESERVATION  OF  ROOM  TYPES 
Program 

Recommendation:  Maintain  existing  original  occupant 
program  if  possible.  Program  new  uses  to  be  compati- 
ble with  existing  interior  spaces  to  minimize  required 
alterations  to  historically  significant  components. 

Promenades,  Stair  Halls,  and  Passages 

Recommendation:  Preserve,  repair,  and  re-use 

original  promenades,  passages,  and  stair  halls. 

Except  for  the  expected  wear  the  original  major 
front  house  public  circulation  areas  are  virtually 
intact.  The  quality  of  their  materials  and  construc- 
tion is  attested  to  by  their  excellent  condition  after 
60  years  of  use. 

1 . Preserve  and  maintain  all  original  finishes  and 
components  in  these  areas. 

2.  Remove  incompatible  alterations  at  the  base- 
ment, mezzanine,  third-and-fourth  floor  prom- 
enades when  feasible. 

3.  Where  new  infill  is  required  due  to  program- 
matic requirements,  finishes  and  components 
should  be  sensitive  to  the  original  finishes. 
The  spatial  quality  of  the  promenades  should 
be  preserved. 

4.  Repair  damaged  and  deteriorated  finishes  in- 
kind  to  match  original  composition  and  confi- 
guration. 

Corridors 

Recommendation:  Preserve,  repair,  and  re-use 

corridors. 


Front-house  corridors  are  intact  and  should  be 
preserved  in  a manner  similar  to  the  promenade 
recommendations.  Rear  house  corridors,  although 
humble,  represent  the  utilitarian  nature  of  the 
original  rear  house  and  should  be  preserved  and 
maintained. 

1.  Preserve  and  maintain  all  original  finishes  and 
components  in  these  areas. 

2.  Repair  damaged  and  deteriorated  finishes  in- 
kind  to  match  original  composition  and  confi- 
guration. 

3.  Retain  and  rehabilitate  existing  miscellaneous 
contributing  components  such  as  fire  hose 
racks,  drinking  fountains,  and  basement  corri- 
dor wall  sconces. 

4.  Provide  alternate  code  complying  fountains 
and  fire  stand  pipes  where  required. 

Vestibules 

Recommendation:  Preserve,  repair,  and  re-use 

original  vestibules. 

Original  vestibules  occur  in  various  configurations 
and  finishes  relating  directly  to  their  adjacent 
primary  space.  Nearly  all  are  intact. 

1.  Preserve  and  maintain  all  original  finishes  and 
components  in  these  areas. 

2.  Repair  damaged  and  deteriorated  finishes  in- 
kind  to  match  original  composition  and  confi- 
guration. 

Stairs 

Recommendation:  Preserve,  repair,  and  re-use 

original  stairs. 


RECOMMENDATIONS  -103 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 

Except  for  the  expected  wear  and  earthquake- 
damaged  finishes,  original  stairways  are  virtually 
intact. 

1.  Preserve  and  re-use  existing  original  stairs. 

2.  Repair  damaged  wall  and  floor  finishes  in- 
kind. 

3.  Use  the  State  Historical  Building  Code  to 
establish  reasonable  methodology  to  rectify  any 
code  deficiencies. 

Elevators 

Recommendation:  Maintain  existing  original 

passenger  elevators.  Rehabilitate  elevators  main- 
taining all  original  architectural  fabric. 

The  original  passenger  elevators  are  integral  to  the 
historic  character  of  the  building.  Unaltered 
elevators  of  this  vintage  and  quality  are  rare  and 
unique. 

1 . Review  the  elevator  operating  mechanisms  and 
carry  out  all  repairs  and  upgrades  required  to 
ensure  that  the  elevators  operate  properly  and 
meet  the  current  programmatic  needs  of  the 
building. 

2.  Perform  required  upgrades  maintaining  all 
original  architectural  features  including  main- 
tenance of  non-functioning  elements. 

Offices 

Recommendation:  Preserve  and  re-use  the  original 
administrative  offices. 

Original  administrative  offices  are  intact  and  are 
important  character-defining  features  of  the  original 
building. 

1.  Preserve  and  re-use  the  existing  offices. 

2.  Develop  a program  to  rehabilitate  altered  or 
new  infill  offices  using  building-standard  com- 


July  9.  1993 

ponents  and  finishes  that  are  compatible  with 
the  original. 

Dressing  Rooms 

Recommendation:  Preserve  and  re-use  the  remain- 
ing dressing  rooms  and  their  furnishings.  Alter 
with  reversible  components  and  finishes  to  adapt  to 
new  performance  requirements. 

Although  simple  in  finish  and  design,  the  dressing 
rooms  represent  the  utilitarian  nature  of  the  origi- 
nal rear  house  and  should  be  preserved. 

1.  Preserve  and  maintain  all  original  finishes, 
components,  and  furnishings  in  these  rooms. 

2.  Repair  damaged  and  deteriorated  finishes  in- 
kind  to  match  original  composition  and  confi- 
guration. 

Toilet  Rooms 

Recommendation:  Preserve  significant  toilet  rooms. 

The  toilet  rooms  are  particularly  significant  in  that 
many  remain  intact,  and  are  detailed  in  ways  not 
seen  in  modem  construction.  The  nickel-plated 
fixtures  and  marble  floors  and  partitions  add  a 
richness  and  character  that  is  virtually  impossible  to 
recreate.  Original  lavatories,  toilets,  urinals,  bath 
tubs  and  fixtures  are  also  significant  and  should  be 
retained. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  there  are  often  accessi- 
ble chases  behind  the  fixtures,  allowing  for  repair  of 
the  plumbing  service  while  retaining  the  existing 
fixtures  and  finishes. 

1.  Retain  and  rehabilitate  historically  significant 
toilet  rooms  and  determine  which  fail  to  meet 
existing  code  compliance  in  terms  of  accessi- 
bility and  quantities. 


104  - CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


2.  Retrofit  existing  toilet  rooms  for  disabled  per- 
sons where  possible,  but  do  not  destroy  their 
historic  character  in  the  process. 

3.  Provide  new  code  complying  toilet  rooms 
where  existing  are  of  insufficient  quantity  or 
size. 

4.  Salvage  original  components  removed  from 
existing  toilet  rooms  and  re-use  in  restoration 
and  alteration  of  toilet  rooms.  Match  finishes 
in-kind  using  salvaged  material  if  possible  or 
duplicate  finishes  if  insufficient  salvaged  mate- 
rial exists. 

Closets 

Recommendation:  Preserve  and  re-use  remaining 
original  features  of  telephone  closets,  janitor’s 
closets,  storage  closets,  and  music  vaults. 

Many  original  features  of  the  janitor  closets,  tele- 
phone closets  and  storage  closets  remain  intact. 
Although  of  relatively  minor  importance  these 
rooms  and  their  components  add  an  additional 
level  of  integrity  to  the  historic  resource. 

1.  Preserve  and  re-use  remaining  features  of 
these  rooms,  including  the  lockers,  plumbing 
elements,  and  trim. 

2.  Repair  damaged  finishes  in  kind. 

PRESERVATION  OF  COMPONENTS 

The  following  elements  are  of  historic  significance 
and  are  described  in  the  Interior  Evaluation  sec- 
tion. These  items  merit  retention  based  upon  the 
following  recommendations. 

General  Recommendation 

Recommendation:  Preserve,  repair,  maintain,  and  re- 
use original  components  wherever  possible.  Relocate  if 
necessary  for  preservation  or  future  restoration.  Estab- 
lish a design  methodology  to  determine  when  and  where 
re-use  of  original  materials  is  appropriate. 


Original  building  elements  include  but  are  not 
limited  to  the  following. 

■ Floor  Finishes 

■ Marble  Finishes 

■ Ornamental  Plaster 

■ Ceramic  Tile 

■ Wood  Trim 

■ Bronze  Elements 

■ Interior  Doors 

■ Hardware 

■ Light  Fixtures 

■ Plumbing  Fixtures 

Floor  Finishes 

Recommendation:  Retain,  repair,  and  clean  original 
floor  finishes.  Replace  in-kind  where  required. 

In  addition  to  marble,  other  flooring  materials 
include  battleship  linoleum,  mastic  rubber  tile,  cast 
stone,  quarry  tile,  and  encaustic  glazed  tile.  While 
not  as  significant  as  marble,  these  original  materials 
contribute  to  the  historical  character  of  the  build- 
ing. These  materials  are  durable  and  present  the 
opportunity  for  potential  reuse. 

1.  Map  finish  locations  on  all  floors. 

2.  Retain,  repair,  and  clean  battleship  linoleum 
and  mastic  rubber  tile  floors  if  possible.  Patch 
damaged  areas  with  new  material  that  matches 
the  original  in  color  and  composition  if  possi- 
ble. 

3.  Retain,  repair,  and  clean  ceramic  tile,  and 
quarry  tile  floors.  Patch  damaged  areas  with 
tile  from  areas  that  will  be  demolished,  will 
never  be  exposed,  or  with  new  material  that 
matches  the  original  in  color  and  composition. 
Maintain  original  layout  and  configuration. 

4.  Retain,  repair,  and  clean  encaustic  glazed  tile. 


RECOMMENDATIONS 


105 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


Marble  Finishes 

Recommendation:  Retain,  repair,  resurface,  clean, 

polished  marble  finishes. 

Marble  is  a very  significant  and  highly  durable 
surface.  Retain,  resurface,  clean,  and  polish  marble 
in  situ.  Avoid  removal,  but  if  removal  is  required, 
test  removal  methods  to  develop  an  appropriate 
salvage,  transportation,  and  storage  procedure. 

Ornamental  Plaster 

Recommendation:  Retain  and  repair  ornamental 

plaster. 

The  plastic  stone  and  cast  plaster  finishes  are 
critical  to  the  building’s  historical  integrity  and 
should  be  preserved.  In  addition,  the  plastic  stone 
is  an  unusual  special  finish  which  will  be  difficult  to 
replicate.  These  finishes  should  be  retained  and 
left  undisturbed  if  possible.  Where  damaged  or 
required  to  be  removed  these  finishes  should  be 
carefully  replaced  in-kind.  Repair  ornamental 
plaster  finishes  as  recommended  in  Material  Re- 
pairs. 

Tile  Wainscot 

Recommendation:  Retain,  repair,  and  clean  original 
tile  wall  finishes.  Replace  in-kind  with  salvaged 
materials  where  possible. 

While  not  as  significant  as  marble,  tile  wall  finish- 
es contribute  to  the  historical  character  of  the 
building.  Tile  is  durable  and  presents  the  oppor- 
tunity for  re-use. 

1.  Retain,  repair,  and  clean  tile  wall  finishes. 

2.  Patch  damaged  areas  with  tiles  from  areas 
that  will  be  demolished,  will  never  be  exposed, 
or  with  new  material  that  matches  the  original 
in  color  and  composition.  Maintain  original 
tile  pattern. 


Interior  Doors 

Recommendations:  Preserve,  repair,  and  re-use  existing 
doors. 

The  wood,  metal,  and  kalamein  doors  are  character 
defining  features  important  to  the  building’s  histori- 
cal integrity.  A commitment  for  respect  of  the 
historic  resource  requires  respect  for  the  importance 
of  these  elements. 

1.  Repair  and  re-use  existing  doors  and  trim  in- 
situ  wherever  possible. 

2.  If  finish  has  been  altered,  refinish  to  match 
original.  Preserve  and  conserve  original  door 
signage  where  possible. 

3.  In  areas  where  alterations  are  required,  care- 
fully remove  and  salvage  doors,  hardware  and 
trim. 

4.  Establish  a building  standard  for  new  office 
improvements  to  re-use  doors  and  trim  in  new 
construction. 

Wood  Trim 

Recommendations:  Retain,  repair,  and  re-use  original 
wood  trim  components. 

Interior  wood  base,  chair  rail,  and  picture  molding 
are  contributing  character-defining  features  of  the 
less  public  areas  and  should  be  retained  where 
possible. 

1.  Retain,  repair,  and  re-use  these  components 
in-  situ. 

2.  Remove  paint  and  refinish  trim  to  match 
original. 

3.  Carefully  remove,  salvage,  and  store  any  com- 
ponents that  must  be  removed. 

4.  Establish  building  standard  details  re-using 
original  base,  chair  rail,  and  picture  molding 
design. 


106  - CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


Hardware 

Recommendations:  Preserve,  repair,  and  re-use  original 
hardware. 

Significant  hardware  includes:  door  hinges,  door 
knobs,  push  plates,  pulls,  vacuum  system  outlets, 
and  wall  mounted  thermostats. 

Small  elements  such  as  these  easily  get  lost  in  the 
large-scale  considerations  of  a major  building 
upgrade  project.  But  it  is  precisely  elements  at  this 
scale  that  distinguish  between  genuine  historical 
character  and  superficial  historic  references.  It  is 
when  the  objects  at  the  scale  of  your  hand  are 
noticeably  different  from  current  ones  that  an 
environment  is  really  experienced  as  coming  from 
another  time. 

1.  Preserve,  repair  and  re-use  these  components 
in  situ  where  possible. 

2.  Where  required,  retrofit  existing  locksets  with 
new  levers  and  springs  to  meet  disabled  access 
requirements. 

3.  Carefully  remove,  salvage,  and  store  any  com- 
ponents that  must  be  removed  for  re-installa- 
tion elsewhere. 

light  Fixtures 

Recommendations:  Preserve,  repair,  and  re-use  original 
light  fixtures.  Replace  missing  globes  or  inappropriate 
fixtures  with  compatible  efficient  fixtures  wherever 
possible. 

The  front-house  elaborate  ornamental  light  fixtures 
are  intrinsic  to  the  Opera  House  elegance  and 
character.  The  front-house  light  fixtures  have  been 
carefully  maintained  and  preserved.  Rear-house 
fixtures  are  less  intact  but  are  also  important 
character  defining  features  of  the  utilitarian  nature 
of  this  part  of  the  building. 


1.  Retain  all  original  fixtures.  Repair  and  replace 
shades  to  match  original  when  required. 

2.  Remove  inappropriate  replacement  fixtures 
and  replace  with  sympathetic  fixtures  if  feasi- 
ble. Maintain  light  quality  by  deemphasizing 
general  fluorescent  illumination. 

3.  Balance  energy  conservation  with  building 
conservation  and  the  sympathetic  treatment  of 
interior  spaces.  Utilize  the  State  Historical 
Building  Code  exemption  from  Title  24  energy 
requirements. 

Plumbing  Fixtures 

Recommendations:  Preserve,  repair,  and  re-use  original 
plumbing  fixtures. 

Plumbing  fixtures  which  are  original  and  in  place 
contribute  to  the  overall  historic  integrity  of  the 
building.  The  majority  of  original  plumbing  fixtures 
in  the  building  are  intact  and  should  be  preserved. 

1.  Retain,  repair,  and  re-use  these  components 
in-situ.  where  possible 

2.  Carefully  remove,  salvage,  and  store  any  com- 
ponents that  can  be  removed  for  re-use. 

3.  Identify  all  remaining  plumbing  fixtures  and 
develop  an  inventory  of  these  components. 

4.  When  original  plumbing  fixtures  must  be 
removed  from  one  area,  reinstall  in  appropriate 
alternate  locations  when  feasible. 

5.  If  modifications  destroy  historic  fabric  seek 
alternate  means  to  meet  water  conservation 
and  disabled  access  requirements. 

MATERIAL  REPAIRS 

Like  the  exterior,  the  interior  of  the  San  Francisco 
Opera  House  is  largely  intact  and  retains  most  of  its 
original  integrity.  Damage  from  the  earthquake  is 
evident  on  the  first  floor,  especially  in  the  foyer 
where  some  cast  stone  is  displaced  and  in  the  stairs 
where  plastic  stone  finishes  over  hollow  clay  tile 


RECOMMENDATIONS  -107 


xiouaddw 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


have  failed.  The  building  interior  has  been  well 
maintained  and,  except  for  the  earthquake  damage 
which  has  yet  to  be  repaired,  remains  in  good  condi- 
tion. The  impact  of  any  proposed  alterations  to  the 
interior  required  by  any  building  improvements  must 
be  carefully  considered.  Because  the  interior  main- 
tains a high  degree  of  integrity,  every  effort  should 
be  made  to  minimize  alterations.  A maintenance 
priority  rating  is  assigned  to  assist  in  identifying 
material  deficiencies  that  may  threaten  life  safety  or 
lead  to  related  building  component  failure. 

General  Recommendations 

Recommendation:  Preserve,  repair,  maintain,  and 
re-use  original  finish  materials  wherever  possible. 
Replace  missing  components  in  kind  where  missing. 
Stabilize  and  repair  existing  original  materials 
including: 

■ Marble 

■ Cast  stone 

■ Plastic  stone  (special  plaster  finish) 

■ Flat,  run,  and  ornamental  plaster 

■ Ornamental  metals 

■ Rubber  tile 

■ Quarry  tile 

Marble 

Priority:  Minor 

Recommendation:  Reset  displaced  marble.  Repair 

chipped  and  cracked  marble. 

Several  varieties  of  marble  exist  at  the  Opera  House 
in  the  form  of  flooring,  column  bases,  wainscot,  and 
wall  facing.  Most  of  the  marble  appears  to  be  in 
very  good  condition  with  deficiencies  limited  to 
cracks,  loose  or  deteriorated  mortar,  and  some 
displacement.  Repair  marble  as  follows: 

1.  Displaced  Marble 

a.  Repair  wall  substrate  prior  to  reinstalling 
marble. 


b.  Verify  with  structural  engineer  for  method 
of  new  anchorage. 

c.  Reset  marble  in  original  location. 

d.  Repoint  matching  composition,  size,  and 
profile  of  original  mortar. 

2.  Cracked  Marble 

a.  Remove  all  loose  particles  back  to  sound 
material. 

b.  Clean  and  prepare  surface  to  accept  adhe- 
sive. 

c.  Verify  with  structural  engineer  where  me- 
chanical fasteners  are  required. 

d.  Apply  adhesive  following  manufacturer’s 
application  instructions. 

3.  Repoint  deteriorated  mortar  joints  as  indicated 
under  Repointing 

Cast  Stone 
Priority:  Minor 

Recommendation:  Restore  existing  cast-stone  elements. 
Reset  displaced  elements,  repoint  open  joints. 

Cast-stone  elements  are  located  in  the  lobby  and 
foyer.  Most  cast-stone  elements  appear  to  be  in  good 
condition  with  deterioration  limited  to  seismic- 
related  displacement.  Repair  existing  cast  stone  as 
follows: 

1.  Verify  with  structural  engineer  if  additional 
anchorage  is  required. 

2.  Reset  displaced  cast-stone  elements.  Install 
new  anchorage  as  specified  by  structural  en- 
gineer. 

3.  Repair  small  chips  as  specified  by  architect. 

4.  Repoint  open  joints  as  indicated  under  repoint- 
ing. 

Plastic  Stone  (Special  Flaster  Finish) 

Priority:  Critical 

Recommendation:  Replace  all  missing  or  deteriorat- 
ed plastic  stone  finishes. 


108  - CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 

Most  of  the  existing  damage  to  the  plastic  stone 
finish  occurs  in  the  stairways  and  is  directly  related 
to  the  Loma  Prieta  earthquake.  Plastic  stone  is 
different  from  flat  plaster  walls  in  that  the  surface  is 
an  integral  cream-ocher  color  with  a large  amount 
of  intentional  hairline  surface  cracking.  The  special 
finish  was  placed  in  main  public  circulation  areas 
and  typically  scored  into  ashlar  blocks. 

Repair  plastic  stone  as  follows: 

1.  Determine  composition  of  original  plaster. 
Replicate  mix  for  repairs. 

2.  Cut  back  deteriorated  plastic  stone  to  sound, 
well-keyed  material  at  scored  joints. 

3.  Install  base  and  scratch-coat  plaster. 

4.  Install  integral  color  finish  coat  plastic  stone 
matching  original  in  color  and  hairline  crack- 
ing. 

Flat,  Run,  and  Ornamental  Plaster 

Priority:  Minor 

Recommendation:  Replace  all  missing  or  deteriorated 
cast,  flat,  and  ornamental  plaster. 

Flat,  run,  and  ornamental  plaster  was  slightly  dam- 
aged in  the  Loma  Prieta  earthquake  and  will  require 
minor  repairs.  Repair  missing  and  deteriorated  flat, 
run,  and  ornamental  plaster  as  follows: 

1.  Ornamental  Plaster 

a.  Prepare  molds  from  adjacent  original  orna- 
mentation for  plaster  areas  to  be  replicated. 

b.  Determine  composition  of  original  plaster. 
Replicate  mix  for  new  ornamentation. 
Cast  new  plaster. 

c.  Determine  where  reinforcement  is  required. 

d.  Install  new  cast  plaster  securely  in  place. 
Align  with  existing  original  plaster. 

e.  Prepare  and  paint  to  match  adjacent  sur- 
faces 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 

2.  Flat  Plaster 

a.  Cut  plaster  back  to  sound  material. 

b.  Install  new  plaster. 

c.  Texture  plaster  to  match  existing  adjacent 
surfaces. 

d.  Prepare  and  paint  to  match  adjacent  sur- 
faces. 

3.  Run-in-Place  Plaster 

a.  Cut  plaster  back  to  sound  material. 

b.  Run-in-place  new  plaster  matching  adja- 
cent original  profile. 

c.  Prepare  and  paint  to  match  adjacent  sur- 
faces. 

Ornamental  Metals 

Priority:  Minor 

Recommendation:  Restore  existing  interior  ornamental 
metals. 

There  are  a variety  of  ornamental  metals  in  the 
Opera  House,  including  bronze  grilles,  bronze 
window  grilles,  bronze  and  brass  fixtures,  free- 
standing lanterns,  balustrades,  and  handrails.  All 
interior  ornamental  metals  appear  to  be  in  good 
condition.  Restore  ornamental  metals  as  follows: 

1.  Remove  build-up  of  soiling  from  all  surfaces 
using  a clean,  soft  cloth. 

2.  On  painted  surfaces,  remove  flaking  paint  and 
surface  rusting.  Prime  and  paint. 

Rubber  Tile 

Priority:  Serious 

Recommendation:  Replace  rubber  tile  where  necessary 
with  tile  matching  original. 

The  original  rubber  tile  has  been  replaced  in  areas 
with  new  tile  that  has  faded  and  buckled.  Restore 
rubber-tile  flooring  as  follows: 


RECOMMENDATIONS  -109 


xiDuaddw 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


1.  Remove  deteriorated  tile. 

2.  Install  new  rubber  tile  to  match  original  tile  if 
possible. 

Quarry  Tile 

Priority:  Minor 

Recommendation:  Re -grout  areas  where  grout  is 

missing  and  replace  any  cracked  tiles. 

The  existing  quarry  tile  is  well  maintained  and  in 
good  condition.  Deterioration  primarily  includes 
small  areas  of  missing  grout.  Restore  quarry  tile 
flooring  as  follows: 


Repointing 

Priority:  Serious 

Recommendation:  Repoint  deteriorated,  loose,  and 
missing  mortar. 

Cast-stone  columns  and  marble  bases  exhibit  a large 
amount  of  open  joints  where  mortar  is  missing, 
loose,  or  otherwise  deteriorated.  Other  cast-stone 
elements  in  the  lobby  that  were  displaced  as  a result 
of  the  Loma  Prieta  earthquake  will  require  repoint- 
ing once  the  elements  are  reset.  Recommended 
repointing  sequence  is  as  follows: 

1.  Analyze  mortar  to  establish  original  composi- 
tion. Specify  repair  mortar  to  match  original. 

2.  Rake  out  all  loose  or  deteriorated  mortar. 

3.  Repoint  with  new  mortar  to  match  original 
color,  texture,  and  profile. 


1.  If  found,  replace  all  cracked  tiles  with  new  to 
match  original  color,  size,  finish,  and  texture. 

2.  Re-grout  areas  where  original  grout  is  missing 
or  deteriorated  with  matching  color  and  pro- 
file.. 


no  • CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993  HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 

STRUCTURAL  RECOMMENDATIONS 


The  following  are  recommendations  for  resolution  of 
the  major  impacts  on  the  historically  significant 
areas  of  the  building  which  the  proposed  structural 
upgrade  will  have. 

STRUCTURAL  IMPROVEMENTS 

Recommendation:  Limit  impact  of  the  structural 

upgrade  on  remaining  historic  fabric  and  locate 
structural  reinforcement  within  original  walls  and 
ceiling  locations  to  allow  for  retention  of  original 
spatial  relationships. 

When  developing  the  seismic  upgrade  design,  the 
remaining  historic  fabric  should  be  given  full  consid- 
eration. The  most  compatible  design  should  be  used 
that  required  the  least  intervention  and  is  located  at 
original  walls. 

■ Locate  structure  to  impact  the  least  amount  of 
remaining  historic  fabric. 

■ Locate  structure  within  original  wall  and  ceiling 
locations  to  allow  for  potential  restoration  of 
original  spaces  and  conformance  with  the 
original  spatial  design. 

■ Where  structure  cannot  be  accommodated 


within  existing  original  walls,  modify  the  wall 
profile  on  the  side  of  least  significance. 

■ Additional  required  or  potential  improvements 
should  minimally  impact  remaining  historic 
fabric  and  should  restore  or  allow  for  potential 
restoration  of  original  spaces. 

■ Prepare  as-built  drawings  for  this  analysis 
documenting  extant  historically  significant 
materials  and  components. 

■ Graphically  document,  with  archival  quality 
photographs  or  measured  drawings,  areas  with 
character-defining  features  that  will  be  demolis- 
hed. 

■ This  seismic  work  provides  a unique  opportuni- 
ty to  use  creative  restoration  techniques  to 
reverse  unsympathetic  alterations.  Explore  the 
potential  for  restoring  original  components,  or 
redesign  with  more  sympathetic  solutions. 

This  approach  will  allow  for  the  greatest  possible 
retention  of  historically  significant  rooms  and 
components  while  minimizing  the  impact  of  rehabil- 
itation. It  will  also  allow  for  the  possibility  of 
future  restoration  that  would  enhance  building 
integrity. 


RECOMMENDATIONS 


xiDuoddw 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Agnost,  George,  and  Judith  L.  Teichman.  “Memorandum:  History  of  the  1921  War  Memorial  Trust 
Agreement  and  the  San  Francisco  War  Memorial;  and  History  of  Space  Allocation  in  the  War 
Memorial  Veterans  Building.”  San  Francisco,  City  Attorney,  4 March  1985. 

Allen,  Joe.  Letter  to  Kurt  Herbert  Adler.  San  Francisco,  18  October  1966. 

Anonymous.  “History,  San  Francisco  War  Memorial.”  Typescript  copy  by  A.  W.  Eidenham,  Secretary, 
War  Memorial  Trustees,  no  date. 

Benet,  James.  Guide  to  San  Francisco  & Bay  Region,  Random  House  1963 

Binder  at  P.A.L.M.  "War  Memorial  Research  S.F.  W.M.  & Performing  Arts  Center" 

Bloomfield,  Arthur.  The  San  Francisco  Opera,  1923-1961.  New  York,  Appleton-Century-Crofts,  1961, 
13-24. 

Board  of  Trustees  of  the  War  Memorial.  President’s  Annual  Report.  San  Francisco,  21  December  1939. 
— . — . 19  December  1940. 

— . — . 14  January  1943. 

— . — . 13  January  1944. 

— . — . 11  January  1945. 

— . — . 10  January  1946. 

— . — . 9 January  1947. 

— . — . 8 January  1948. 

Cahill,  B.  J.  S.  “The  San  Francisco  War  Memorial  Group.”  Architect  and  Engineer,  111/2  (November 
1932),  10-42. 

Carey  &.  Co.,  Inc.  War  Memorial  Construction  Archives  Database  List.  San  Francisco,  1993. 
“Ceremony  of  Comer  Stone  Laying.”  Program.  Program.  San  Francisco,  11  November  1931. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


113 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


“Ceremony  of  Dedication  of  the  San  Francisco  War  Memorial  Buildings.”  Invitation.  San  Francisco,  9 
September  1932. 

Chronister,  Jay  (Superintendant  of  War  Memorial  Buildings  and  Grounds).  Interviews,  December  1992 
and  March  1993. 

Fitzke,  Daniel.  “Opera  House  Stage  Largest  in  America.”  Architect  and  Engineer,  111/2  (November 
1932),  45-46. 

“Ground-Breaking  Exercises  for  the  San  Francisco  War  Memorial.”  Program.  San  Francisco,  11 
November  1926. 

Hansen,  Gladys.  San  Francisco  Almanac.  San  Rafael,  Presidio  Press,  1980. 

Herbst  Theater.  Dedication  Program.  San  Francisco,  21  June  1978. 

Hinkle,  Warren.  “A  Battle  for  Turf  at  the  Veterans’  Building.”  San  Francisco  Chronicle,  27  September 
1984,  4. 

Leland,  William  E.  “Mechanical  Equipment  of  War  Memorial  Group.”  Architect  and  Engineer,  111/2 
(November  1932),  47-48. 

Lockwood,  Charles.  Suddenly  San  Fancisco.  San  Francisco,  California  Living  Books,  1978. 

McGilvray  Ramond  Corporation.  “Raymond  Granite.”  Architect  and  Engineer,  111/2  (November  1932), 
75. 

“Rumbling  Drums,  Massed  Colors,  Gleaming  Steel  Blaze  Path  of  Glory.”  Chronicle,  23  February  1933,  6. 

Sanborn  Map  Company.  Insurance  Maps  of  San  Francisco.  1886,  II,  54. 

— . — . 1899,  III,  253. 

— . — . 1913,  IV,  328. 

— . — . 1950,  IV,  328. 

San  Francisco  Arts  Library:  Museum  Jomal,  No.  2,  Fall  ’89 

San  Francisco  Board  of  Supervisors.  City  Budget  Proposed  for  Fiscal  Year  1949-1950. 


114  - CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


— . — 1950-1951. 

— . — 1951-1952. 

— . — 1952-1953. 

— . — 1953-1954. 

— . — 1954-1955. 

— . ...  1955-1956. 

— . 1956-1957. 

— . — 1957-1958. 

— . — 1958-1959. 

— . — 1959-1960. 

— . — 1960-1961. 

— . — 1961-1962. 

— . — 1962-1963. 

— . — 1963-1964. 

— . _ 1964-1965. 

— . — 1965-1966. 

— . — 1966-1967. 

San  Francisco  Bureau  of  Architecture.  Catalogues  of  Drawings,  Opera  House  and  Veterans  Building. 
Mss. 

San  Francisco  Chronicle  Folder.  22  June  1849. 

San  Francisco  Chronicle.  26  April  1945. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


115 


SAN  FRANCISCO  OPERA  HOUSE 


July  9,  1993 


San  Francisco  Chronicle.  15  October  1972. 

San  Francisco  Directory.  Passim. 

San  Francisco  News.  14  August  1928. 

22  January  1930. 

— . 25  January  1930. 

Skidmore  Owings  & Merrill,  and  Wurster  Bernardi  & Emmons.  Bid  package  summary.  San  Francisco, 
15  June  1967. 

Letter  to  Fred  Campagnoli.  San  Francisco,  2 November  1966. 

— . — . San  Francisco,  7 March  1967. 

— . Letter  to  Philip  Boone.  San  Francisco,  19  June  1967. 

Minutes  of  meeting  with  Building  Committee.  San  Francisco,  9 August  1967. 

Progress  Report.  San  Francisco,  9 August  1968. 

— . — . — , 8 May  1968. 

San  Francisco  Stage:  From  Gold  Rush  to  Golden  Spike,  1849-1869,  Misha  Berson 

Skidmore  Owings  &.  Merrill,  Public  Structures  Inc.,  and  Syska  &.  Hennessy  Inc.  “Specifications  for  Stage 
Lighting,  Intercommunication  System,  Closed  Circuit  TV.”  San  Francisco,  22  August  1966. 

— . “Specifications  for  Stage  Rigging.”  San  Francisco,  19  August  1966. 

Snyder,  Christopher  H.  “Structural  Features  of  the  San  Francisco  Opera  House.”  Architect  and  Engineer, 
111/2  (November  1932),  43. 

Swan,  Clifford  M.  “The  Acoustics  of  the  San  Francisco  Opera  House.”  Architect  and  Engineer,  111/2 
(November  1932),  44. 

Wallace,  Dean.  “New  Sound  in  the  City.’C hronile,  2 October  1963,  44. 

War  M emorail  Opera  House  Opening  Night  Program,  Ballet  Folder  Series  XVIII  Architectural  Records 


116  - CAREY  & CO.  INC. 


July  9,  1993 


HISTORIC  STRUCTURE  REPORT 


“Welcoming  Ceremony,  Conference  for  Conclusion  and  Signature  of  Treaty  of  Peace  with  Japan.” 
Program.  San  Francisco  Opera  House,  4 September  1951. 

Wurster  Bernardi  &.  Emmons,  and  Skidmore  Owings  & Merrill.  “Report  on  Rehabilitation  and 
Modernization  of  San  Francisco  War  Memorial  Center.”  San  Francisco,  1965. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


117 


